arXiv:2603.28986v1 [cs.AI] 30 Mar 2026
Mimosa Framework: Toward Evolving
Multi-Agent Systems for Scientific Research
Martin Legrand*1,2, Tao Jiang*1,2, Matthieu Feraud1,2, Benjamin Navet1, 2, 3, Yousouf
Taghzouti1, 2, 3, Fabien Gandon2, 3, Elise Dumont1, and Louis-Félix Nothias*1,2
1Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, ICN, Nice, France
2Interdisciplinary Institute for Artificial Intelligence (3iA) Côte d’Azur, Sophia-Antipolis,
France
3Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, France
30th March 2026
Abstract
Current Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR) systems, despite lever-
aging large language models (LLMs) and agentic architectures, remain
constrained by fixed workflows and toolsets that prevent adaptation to
evolving tasks and environments. We introduce Mimosa, an evolving multi-
agent framework that automatically synthesizes task-specific multi-agent
workflows and iteratively refines them through experimental feedback.
Mimosa leverages the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for dynamic tool
discovery, generates workflow topologies via a meta-orchestrator, executes
subtasks through code-generating agents that invoke available tools and
scientific software libraries, and scores executions with an LLM-based judge
whose feedback drives workflow refinement.
On ScienceAgentBench, Mimosa achieves a success rate of 43.1% with
DeepSeek-V3.2, surpassing both single-agent baselines and static multi-
agent configurations. Our results further reveal that models respond
heterogeneously to multi-agent decomposition and iterative learning, indi-
cating that the benefits of workflow evolution depend on the capabilities
of the underlying execution model.
Beyond these benchmarks, Mimosa’s modular architecture and tool-
agnostic design make it readily extensible, and its fully logged execution
traces and archived workflows support auditability by preserving every
analytical step for inspection and potential replication. Combined with
domain-expert guidance, the framework has the potential to automate a
broad range of computationally accessible scientific tasks across disciplines.
Released as a fully open-source platform, Mimosa aims to provide an open
foundation for community-driven ASR.
*Co-correspondingauthors: martin.legrand@univ-cotedazur.fr, tao.jiang@univ-cotedazur.fr,
louis-felix.nothias@univ-cotedazur.fr
11 Introduction
Context and Problem. Advances in automation, high-throughput experi-
mentation, and computation have greatly expanded the scientific community’s
capacity to generate data—in fields such as biology, drug discovery, materials
science, and climate modeling—but the ability to transform these data into
actionable knowledge has not kept pace [1, 2]. Researchers must continually
arbitrate between breadth and depth of analysis under the practical constraints
of time, expertise, and computational resources [3], even as pressing societal
challenges underscore the need for methods that accelerate knowledge generation
beyond current limits [4].
Compounding this bottleneck, the fragmentation of methods, tools, and
reporting standards across laboratories has produced a reproducibility crisis in
which critical findings become difficult or impossible to verify [5]. Reliable and
unreliable results intermingle within the scientific record, growing increasingly
indistinguishable [6]. When subsequent research builds on this uncertain founda-
tion without efficient means to audit prior claims, the risk of misdirecting future
work escalates [7].
Addressing these interconnected challenges requires systems that not only
automate scientific tasks at scale—whether purely computational or involving
laboratory instruments through digital interfaces—but do so through transparent,
adaptable workflows whose every analytical step is recorded and auditable, both
during the production cycle and when results are communicated [7].
State of the Art and Gap. Emerging paradigms such as Autonomous Sci-
entific Research (ASR) and Self-Driving Labs (SDLs) [8, 9] offer a promising
path forward by automating core scientific tasks and experimentation. Recent
systems leverage large language models (LLMs) with expanded context windows,
domain-specialized agentic architectures, and reasoning frameworks such as
tree-of-thought and tool-augmented agents that execute multi-step experimental
protocols with increasing sophistication [10, 11]. State-of-the-art platforms pro-
pose to integrate instrument control, literature retrieval, and iterative hypothesis
refinement within unified pipelines [12].
However, current AI-agent systems exhibit two interconnected limitations
when deployed in complex, real-world scientific settings: (1) limitations in
long-horizon LLM-based execution, including context window constraints and
degraded use of relevant information across extended trajectories, which are
associated with failure modes such as information loss, hallucinations, attention
dilution, and semantic drift [13, 14]; and (2) architectural rigidity, namely a
limited ability to reorganize agent coordination, communication structure, and
tool use in response to evolving experimental demands, unexpected tool failures,
or non-linear discovery trajectories [12].
In practice, these systems typically rely on fixed toolsets, computational
libraries, and predefined coordination protocols, which prevent them from recon-
figuring when new instruments or software resources are introduced, objectives
are revised, or intermediate results call for alternative analytical paths. Conse-
2quently, even sophisticated systems remain bounded by their initial configuration
and function as powerful but brittle automation tools rather than genuinely
adaptive scientific systems.
Research Questions and Contributions. Our central research question
is: How can multi-agent systems adjust their coordination and tool use as
scientific tasks change, without losing important context or becoming too rigid to
adapt? A complementary question asks how such a system can remain capable
across the full breadth of tasks that scientific research demands—from data
acquisition and computational analysis to control of experimental apparatus
throughprogrammaticinterfaces, resultinterpretation, andknowledgesynthesis—
rather than excelling only in narrow, predefined operations. A third, longer-term
motivation concerns the computational reproducibility of published scientific
results.
To make this concrete, consider computational drug design. A typical study
runs through several connected stages: virtual screening, molecular docking,
and molecular dynamics simulations [15]. Each stage requires different expertise
and different decisions, often under competing scientific and computational
constraints. Results from later stages frequently challenge earlier assumptions,
requiring iterative revision of parameters, hypotheses, or analytical paths [16].
Suchrecursiveadjustmentisconstitutiveofcomplexscientificinquiry, particularly
in interdisciplinary and computationally intensive settings. Current AI systems,
however, lack robust mechanisms to maintain specialized roles across stages,
critically reassess earlier decisions, or adapt focus as new findings emerge. Single-
agent systems and fixed pipelines offer no reliable means of doing so, and the
same rigidity limits the potential for revisiting prior computational analyses in a
systematic way.
We address these challenges through Mimosa, an open-source framework for
automated computational scientific tasks. Its modular architecture leverages
the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [17] for dynamic integration of diverse
computational tools and laboratory instruments. Rather than relying on static
pipelines, Mimosa dynamically composes task-specific workflows and refines
them in response to execution feedback.
This adaptability is sustained by a meta-learning layer that continuously
refines how agentic workflows are designed and coordinated based on prior
performance.
Mimosa offers an open alternative to closed, rigid systems for automating
time-consuming scientific tasks from minimal task instructions. More broadly,
it is designed to help researchers scale analytical work more effectively and to
support efforts toward more reliable and auditable scientific discovery.
Code availability. Both Mimosa and Toolomics, our companion platform for
MCP server management, are released as open-source software under the Apache
License 2.0, a permissive open-source license enabling broad reuse, modification,
and integration across research and industrial environments:
3https://github.com/HolobiomicsLab/Mimosa-AI
https://github.com/HolobiomicsLab/Toolomics
2 Related work
2.1 Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR)
The emergence of LLMs has catalyzed a paradigm shift from “AI for Science”,
where models act as static predictors, to “agentic science”, characterized by
autonomous decision-making and iterative reasoning [18]. Unlike traditional
automation restricted to predefined tasks, ASR leverages the reasoning and
planning capabilities of agentic systems to operate across multiple stages of
the research lifecycle [12], with recent surveys noting a move beyond literature
synthesis toward more active roles in hypothesis generation and experimental
design [19]. A critical frontier now shifts attention from model capacity alone
to the scalability of agentic systems: their ability to manage complex tasks,
large scientific datasets, and multiple concurrent workflows with reasonable
computational and economic efficiency [11]. In this regime, bottlenecks arise
from the rigidity of agent coordination [20], saturation of context windows with
data returned by scientific tools [21], and brittle decision-making over extended
discovery trajectories [22].
In domains such as molecular docking and materials discovery, ASR systems
provide a dual benefit: they leverage domain-specific expertise and state-of-the-
art cheminformatics tools to explore chemical spaces far beyond human capacity,
while making the scientific process inherently reproducible and auditable by
design [11, 18]. Closed-loop experimentation is particularly transformative
in materials science and catalysis, where experimental landscapes are often
non-linear and highly complex [8]. By offloading execution and optimization to
autonomousplatforms, researcherscanprioritizehigh-levelanalysis, experimental
strategy, theory development and interpretation.
While ASR focuses on the cognitive and computational aspects of discovery,
Self-Driving Labs (SDLs) represent the physical realization of these principles
through the integration of AI-driven decision-making with programmatically
accessible laboratory instruments [8]. SDLs close the experimental loop by
enabling AI systems to analyze outputs, select informative next experiments, and
iteratively adapt experimental design [23]. As these systems increasingly close
the loop, the primary limitation shifts from task-specific automation to the design
of adaptive agentic architectures capable of sustaining long-horizon reasoning,
coordination, and methodological self-revision under sparse and delayed scientific
feedback [12]. These challenges motivate a closer examination of the agentic
architectures that underpin such systems.
42.2 Agentic Architectures
The transition from static LLMs to agentic systems is defined by the integration
of reasoning, tool-use, agent-to-agent collaboration and iterative planning [10].
While much of this work targets coding, mathematics, and general reasoning
benchmarks, the architectural patterns it introduces—task decomposition, role
specialization, and automated agent design—are directly relevant to scientific
computing and discovery. Agents have demonstrated initial success in scientific
domains such as chemical synthesis planning [24] and mechanistic enzyme design
[25], reflecting increasingly active engagement with AI-driven scientific design in
these areas.
Long-horizon adaptability further requires mechanisms for strategy revision,
self-reflection, and coordination updates in response to empirical feedback [12].
Multiple paradigms in architecture have emerged to address these issues.
2.2.1 Single-Agent Systems
Early frameworks rely on a single tool-augmented agent to handle multiple stages
of a given research task. While capable of accelerating hypothesis generation
in specialized fields like protein design [25], single-agent systems are prone to
performance collapse when faced with unfamiliar tasks such as newest Kaggle
challenges [26] or novel research challenges [27].
A critical failure mode is the inability to recover from early erroneous hypothe-
ses, as a single reasoning trajectory offers no mechanism to escape a flawed line of
inquiry once committed, leading to terminal reasoning loops. Without external
critique or adaptive strategy revision, early sampling errors can irreversibly
corrupt the entire discovery trajectory [12].
2.2.2 Multi-Agent Systems (MAS)
To address the limitations of single-agent systems, MAS frameworks distribute
cognitive load across specialized roles—experimenters, analysts, reviewers—
sometimes equipped with dedicated tools, collaborating to verify results [28].
While multi-agent coordination has been shown to degrade performance
on sequential reasoning tasks [20], other work establishes that under specific
prompting conditions, MAS can develop measurable emergent coordination that
improves task performance through complementary role specialization [29].
Furthermore, recent studies suggest mainstream MAS operate as constrained
finite-state machines with predefined transition protocols [30], where fixed coordi-
nation protocols conflict with the open-ended and non-linear nature of real-world
scientific inquiry [31].
Scientific discovery requires agents to dynamically reconfigure their inter-
action topology in response to task complexity, uncertainty, and unexpected
experimental outcomes, capabilities largely absent from static MAS designs [18].
52.2.3 Automated Agent Design and Self-Evolving Systems
A prominent line of work treats the design of agentic systems itself as a search
problem. ADAS [32] introduces a meta-agent that iteratively programs new
agents in an unconstrained code space, maintaining an archive of discovered
designs. AgentSquare [33] proposes a modular design space decomposing agents
intofourfunctionalmodules(planning, reasoning, tooluse, memory)andsearches
over module combinations via evolution and recombination. GPTSwarm [34]
models multi-agent systems as computational graphs and optimizes edge weights
and node operations. EvoAgent [35] uses evolutionary algorithms to automati-
cally extend single-agent systems into multi-agent populations. At the prompt
level, Promptbreeder [36] and EvoPrompt [37] demonstrate that prompts can be
evolved through iterative mutation and selection. Many of these systems were
introduced and evaluated on coding, mathematics, and general reasoning tasks,
though some have also been tested in broader tool-use settings.
At the frontier of this design-as-search paradigm, self-evolving systems exhibit
meta-learning — the ability to autonomously modify their own code, tools, and
architectures [32, 38]. For scientific agents, optimization and evolution are not
merely about refining parameters, but about improving how agents navigate the
scientific landscape — from leveraging prior knowledge and reasoning strategies
to mastering specialized tools and structuring memory [12]. Systems such
as the Darwin Gödel Machine [39] and MAS-Zero [40] explore open-ended
self-modification, while CASCADE [41] extends cumulative executable skill
acquisition to scientific domains.
However, although much of this literature was initially validated on coding
and reasoning benchmarks, recent work has begun extending self-improving
agent design to scientific computing tasks. These tasks place greater emphasis on
domain-specific tools, heterogeneous data formats, and experimentally or domain-
grounded outputs than the benchmark settings that motivated much of the early
literature. The remaining gap reflects both the relatively recent emergence of
suitable scientific benchmarks and a difference in search space: many of these
systems evolve unconstrained agent code, agent-level strategies, or coordination
patterns, whereas scientific workflows require explicit organization around hetero-
geneous tools, structured task decomposition, and domain-grounded validation.
Direct comparison on a shared benchmark remains an open challenge.
Recent automated multi-agent architecture search methods broaden this
design space in complementary directions. MaAS [40] replaces the search for a
single static architecture with an agentic supernet from which query-dependent
workflows are sampled at inference time. AutoMaAS [30] extends this line with
neural architecture search-inspired operator generation, fusion, and elimination
under joint performance–cost objectives. MetaAgent [30] casts system con-
struction as finite-state-machine synthesis with explicit state transitions, while
MAS-Zero [40] performs inference-time design–critique–refine without a held-out
validation set.
Recent ASR systems illustrate how workflow-design choices translate into
end-to-end scientific capability. The AI Scientist-v2 advances end-to-end scien-
6tific paper production through agentic tree search [42], while CASCADE [41]
introduces both a cumulative skill-acquisition framework and its companion
SciSkillBench benchmark for chemistry and materials tasks. On the evaluation
side, BixBench [43] provides a dedicated benchmark for LLM-based agents in
computational biology, and ScienceAgentBench [44] offers 102 data-driven dis-
covery tasks spanning four scientific disciplines. Together these developments
underscore rapid progress in ASR while leaving open the question of how to
achieve auditable, adaptive workflow evolution across heterogeneous scientific
tasks.
2.3 Summary of open challenges
Across these paradigms, four interconnected limitations persist. First, single-
agent frameworks suffer from semantic drift, reasoning collapse, and progressive
loss of epistemic memory as context accumulates [14, 45, 46], leading to terminal
reasoning loops and repetitive errors [27, 47].
Second, multi-agent systems mitigate drift through specialization but remain
bound by static coordination protocols that cannot adapt when experiments
behave unexpectedly, new tools are introduced, or existing tool documentation
is updated [18].
Third, self-evolving architectures have demonstrated meta-learning on coding
and reasoning benchmarks [32, 39], and recent work has begun extending cumu-
lative skill acquisition to scientific domains, notably chemistry and materials
science [41]. In parallel, a growing number of systems target heterogeneous
scientific tool ecosystems in biomedicine and bioinformatics, with dedicated
benchmarks also emerging [43]. However, these capabilities are still rarely
demonstrated together: cumulative skill growth, broad scientific domain cover-
age, and architecture-level self-modification typically remain distributed across
separate lines of work and validation settings.
Fourth, existing ASR systems still seldom treat the execution environment as
a first-class design concern. In many systems, tool invocations remain effectively
stateless, environment configurations are implicit, and execution traces are not
captured in a form structured for downstream verification [7]. Dependence on
proprietary, closed-weight models or opaque agentic systems further compounds
this problem, creating barriers to reproducibility, auditing, and community
adoption [5].
These gaps motivate an architecture that treats the system’s own coordination
and exploration logic as a mutable, learnable component, while embedding the
reproducibility and traceability principles established by scientific workflow
managers into AI-driven research automation.
2.4 Positioning of Mimosa
Relative to the paradigms surveyed above, Mimosa addresses these limitations
through a combination of design choices that span workflow evolution, tool
integration, and execution infrastructure. Unlike prompt-level methods such as
7Promptbreeder [36] and EvoPrompt [37], and unlike architecture search systems
such as MaAS, AutoMaAS, MetaAgent, and MAS-Zero that were primarily
introduced on general reasoning workloads, Mimosa targets scientific computing
and combines four design choices that are central to its evolutionary design and
still uncommon in combination: (1) it operates over DAG-structured workflows
with explicit agent roles, communication edges, and tool allocations rather than
unconstrained code or fixed module slots; (2) it integrates dynamic tool discov-
ery via MCP, enabling evolved workflows to adapt to changing computational
environments; (3) it is developed for scientific research tasks and evaluated on
ScienceAgentBench [44], where ground-truth assessment is available, providing
both a fitness signal for workflow evolution and an empirical testbed that remains
comparativelyuncommoninpriorautomateddesignwork; and(4)itdeploystools
as containerised MCP servers within isolated execution environments, producing
structured execution traces that are reproducible and auditable—properties that,
combined with its open-source design, make discovered workflows verifiable and
portable across computational contexts. While Mimosa is inspired by evolution-
ary design principles developed for open-ended objectives, in this work we focus
on iterative refinement of task-specific workflows.
3 Methods
3.1 Motivation for evolving workflow topology
3.1.1 From Single-Agent Limits to Workflow Topology
Large language models generate outputs by sampling from a policy πθ(·|p,o)
conditioned on a prompt pand tool set o⊆O, where θare frozen weights. When
equipped with execution capabilities, an agent follows an iterative trajectory:
τ = s(0), a(0), r(0), s(1), a(1), r(1), ..., s(n)
where s(k) ∼πθ(·|p,τ<k) is the model output at step k, a(k) = parse(s(k)) is
the extracted action or code, and r(k) = exec(a(k)) is the result of its execution.
The agent terminates when a(n) invokes a terminal action, yielding final output
s∗
.
Semantic drift. Context accumulates linearly across steps:
ck = [p, s(0), a(0), r(0), ..., s(k)]
As |ck|grows, attention dilutes over earlier tokens and the effective opti-
mization target shifts from task completion toward self-consistency with prior
outputs [48]. This is consistent with evidence that information placed in the
middle of a long context is used less reliably than information near the bound-
aries [14], and recent work shows that long-horizon agents can progressively
deviate from their initial objective, a failure mode termed goal drift [45]. Herein,
we refer to this progressive divergence as semantic drift.
83.1.2 Workflow Topology as a Structural Mitigation
Multi-agentworkflowsaddresssemanticdriftthroughtaskdecomposition. Rather
than accumulating context over a long trajectory, the problem is decomposed
into subtasks, each handled by an agent with bounded context.
Definition. A workflow W is a directed acyclic graph:
W = (A, E)
where A= {a1,...,ak}is a set of agents (vertices) and E ⊆A×A defines
information flow (edges). Each agent ai = (pi,oi,θi) is assigned a subtask ti, a
prompt pi, and a tool subset oi, and operates with fixed model parameters θi.
Execution proceeds by topological order: each agent receives a bounded context
[pi, s∗
i−1]1 consisting of its prompt and the predecessor’s output, capping context
at O(Lsubtask) rather than O(k·Lsubtask) for a single agent.
Sensitivity to Prompt Specification Workflow performance is sensitive
to how the global task tG is specified. An ambiguous or misaligned prompt
propagates errors across the agent graph, and no per-agent optimization recovers
a workflow that is structurally misaligned with the true objective. This motivates
treating the workflow itself as a discovery problem, iteratively reshaping topology,
prompts, and tool allocations in response to execution feedback.
Workflow Execution Trace of final agent outputs:
Executing workflow W yields an ordered tuple
s∗
W = s∗
1, s∗
2, ..., s∗
|A|
where s∗
i is the terminal output of agent ai ∈A, ordered by the topological sort
of W.
Workflow Discovery Problem We formulate workflow discovery as local
search over the discrete space of workflow topologies W. The objective is to find:
W∗= arg max W∈W
J(s∗
W) (1)
where J(s∗
W) is the expected performance of the workflow on global task tG
,
evaluated by an LLM-as-a-judge [49] over four evaluation criteria:
J(s∗
W) = 1
4 g(s∗
W) + c(s∗
W) + q(s∗
W) + a(s∗
W) (2)
where g, c, q, a denote goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality,
and answer plausibility respectively, each scored over the execution trajectory τ.
This judge provides approximate rather than exact quality signal; its directional
1This notation is a simplification for clarity. In Mimosa’s implementation, agents receive a
sliding window of recent outputs from a shared cumulative state, permitting access beyond the
immediate predecessor.
9accuracy is sufficient to drive convergence, and its correlation with benchmark
ground-truth metrics is left to future work.
Workflow mutations are single structural edits drawn from three operations:
prompt refinement (rewriting pi for one agent), agent addition or removal
(inserting or deleting a node from A with reconnected edges), and edge rewiring
(modifying E to redirect information flow). Each mutation is proposed by an
LLM given the current workflow definition and its evaluation feedback.
Initialization For a new task tnew, we query the workflow archive Afor prior
candidates with similar task specifications:
C= {W ∈A|sim(tW, tnew) >ϵ} (3)
where sim is the embedding cosine similarity function, ϵ= 0.7 is the similarity
threshold and tW is the task prompt associated with workflow W. If C̸= ∅, we
select the highest-scoring candidate W0 = arg maxW∈Cscore(W) where score(W)
is the archived performance of the workflow on tW and apply a single mutation
to adapt it to tnew. If C= ∅, W0 is synthesized de novo via one-shot LLM
generation from tnew alone. (In practice, this de novo path was taken for all
evaluated tasks; see Section 7.)
Iterative Refinement Starting from W0, the meta-orchestrator performs
single-incumbent local search. At each iteration n:
1. Let Wn be the best-performing workflow observed so far.
2. Generate a neighbor W′←Mutate(Wn) via a single structural or prompt-
level edit proposed by the LLM.
3. Execute W′, collect the final output of all the agents s∗
W
′, and compute
J(s∗
W
′).
4. Accept: Wn+1 ←W′if J(s∗
W
′) >J(s∗
Wn ), else Wn+1 ←Wn.
Search terminates after a predefined number of iterations or when J(τ) >
0.9. Unlike population-based evolutionary methods, only the single incumbent
generates offspring; exploration is strictly local. Through successive refinement,
the meta-orchestrator relocates, merges, or subdivides agent responsibilities,
progressively aligning the workflow topology with the underlying structure of
the task’s solution space.
3.2 Architecture
The Mimosa framework is implemented as an evolving MAS, decomposed into
five distinct layers: (0) an optional planning layer that decomposes high-level
scientific goals into individual tasks; (1) a tool discovery layer that dynamically
enumerates available computational resources via MCP; (2) a meta-orchestration
layer that synthesises and iteratively refines task-specific multi-agent workflows;
10(3) an agent execution layer in which code-generating agents carry out subtasks
using discovered tools; and (4) a judge layer that evaluates workflow executions
and provides structured feedback to guide iterative refinement. This structure
enables the transition from static pipelines to dynamic, empirically-optimized
workflows. Each layer is described in turn below.
3.2.1 Layer 0 (Optional): Planning
To understand Mimosa’s planning layer, it is essential to distinguish between
the notions of goal and task.
Agoal isahigh-levelscientificobjectivewithsubstantialscopeandcomplexity.
Achieving a goal typically requires long-horizon planning and the coordinated
execution of multiple heterogeneous tasks [28, 50]. Goals are usually domain-
specific and problem-driven, and they define what is to be achieved.
In contrast, a task is a granular, well-defined, and repeatable operation that
contributes to the completion of a goal [50]. Tasks are generally learnable,
reusable across different goals, and often appear in multiple scientific workflows.
Tasks define how progress toward a goal is made.
For example, the goal "Develop a machine learning model to predict pro-
tein–ligand binding affinity" can be decomposed into several distinct tasks, such
as: (i) conducting a literature review on existing binding-affinity prediction meth-
ods, (ii) acquiring and preprocessing datasets from public repositories, (iii) imple-
menting and training a specific machine learning algorithm, and (iv) evaluating
model performance using standardized benchmarks.
Each individual task is then given as a prompt for the meta-orchestration
layer (Layer 2), which learns an optimal workflow for the task through iterative
improvement. Over successive executions, this layer refines its strategy based on
previous outcomes, enabling more efficient and reliable task completion.
The planning layer in Mimosa is optional and the system can operate
either in goal or task mode. In goal mode, a planning component decomposes
high-level objectives into multiple tasks, each of which is dispatched to the
meta-orchestrator. In task mode, the planning layer is bypassed entirely: each
prompt is treated as a single, self-contained task and directly handled by the
meta-orchestrator.
Since this work focuses on demonstrating the impact of evolution at the
individual task level, all evaluations are conducted in task mode. In this setting,
the planning layer is omitted, and each prompt is considered as a single, learnable
task without explicit goal decomposition. Each task is solved by a custom multi-
agent workflow created or evolved by the meta-orchestrator.
11Figure 1: The Mimosa Framework. The system operates through five sequential
layers: (0) Divide into sub-tasks — the planner divides the user objective
into sub-tasks; (1) Discover Tools — available MCP servers are scanned and
enumerated via Toolomics; (2) Initialize Workflow — the archive is queried for
a similar prior task, and the best matching workflow is retrieved or synthesized
from scratch; (3) Execute Workflow — specialized agents execute the task
using discovered relevant tools; (4) Evaluate Workflow — a judge scores the
execution and the meta-orchestrator mutates the workflow for the next iteration;
the evaluated workflow is archived, and the loop repeats until the judge score
exceeds 0.9 or the predefined number of iterations is reached.
123.2.2 Layer 1: Tool Discovery
To achieve modularity, Mimosa leverages MCP [17]2 for standardized tool
integration. Tool discovery is operationalized through Toolomics, a companion
project we developed for automated management of MCP servers, which exposes
computational tools as discoverable services and allows users to easily integrate
custom tools for specific research needs.
Before executing a task, the system scans predefined port ranges on local
networks to identify available MCP servers.
This architecture enables distributed computation across HPC clusters, cloud
services, and laboratory instruments via MCP’s standardized interface. It
supports horizontal scalability: new computational tools (statistical analysis,
ML pipelines, wet-lab automation) are registered as MCP servers in Toolomics
without modifying Mimosa’s core orchestration logic. Because each tool runs as
an independent server, computationally intensive operations can be offloaded to
dedicated high-performance instances, and multiple agents can invoke tools in
parallel without competing for local resources.
Toolomics also enables multi-tenancy through isolated workspaces and per-
server resource allocation, which is critical to avoid dependency conflicts and
support collaborative scenarios where multiple Mimosa instances operate si-
multaneously. This containerised, workspace-isolated design also mitigates the
expanded attack surface inherent in MCP-based tool exposure [51], enforcing
sandboxing at the server level rather than relying on conservative tool enablement
alone.
3.2.3 Layer 2: Meta-Orchestration
ThecoreofMimosa’sadaptabilityliesinitsmeta-orchestrator, whichdynamically
generates and refines multi-agent workflows through iterative local search. Rather
than relying on static pipeline definitions, the system synthesizes specialized
multi-agent architectures on-demand and greedily refines successful patterns to
optimize future performance.
Workflow Initialization via Case-Based Retrieval. When presented with
a new task (defined by user input in task mode or by the planner in goal mode),
the system first scans specified port ranges to discover available tools exposed
as MCP servers by Toolomics. The full set of discovered tools is presented to
the meta-orchestrator, which assigns task-relevant subsets to individual agents
during workflow synthesis; these allocations are part of the workflow definition
and can be modified by subsequent mutations.
The meta-orchestrator then queries the workflow archive for prior executions
with semantically similar task prompts using embedding-based similarity match-
ing. Specifically, it retrieves the single highest-scoring workflow among those
exceeding a similarity threshold of 0.7.
2Specification: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-03-26; source:
https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol
13If such a workflow exists, a high-capability LLM (e.g., Claude Opus 4.5)
mutates this workflow via a single modification, adjusting agent prompts, adding
or removing agents, rewiring communication edges. If no sufficiently similar
workflow exists in the archive, the system synthesizes a workflow from scratch
based on the task description alone.3
All workflows are encoded as directed graphs using the LangGraph frame-
work [52]. Nodes represent either SmolAgent [53] instances (autonomous code-
generating agents for complex reasoning and tool interaction) or deterministic
Python functions serving as validation gates and conditional flow control. This
architecture balances the flexibility of agents with the reliability of explicit
control logic.
Greedy Iterative Refinement. The judge evaluates the execution trajectory
across four criteria: goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality, and
answer plausibility, and computes an overall score as their average. Without
access to ground truth, this last criterion assesses the internal consistency and
domain-appropriateness of the output rather than its factual correctness; the risk
of rewarding plausible but wrong answers is an inherent limitation of LLM-based
evaluation and is discussed in Section 7.
In learning mode, the system performs single-incumbent search on the current
task. At each iteration, the meta-orchestrator ingests the best-performing
workflow observed so far, along with its execution trace and the judge’s structured
feedback. Based on this feedback, the meta-orchestrator proposes a single
targeted modification to generate a mutated workflow, which is then executed
and scored.
This procedure continues for a predefined number of iterations, constituting
a bounded refinement loop rather than open-ended evolutionary search. Only
the single incumbent generates offspring; exploration is strictly local, targeting
task-specific improvement within a fixed computational budget. All evaluated
workflows are archived, enabling retrieval and adaptation for similar tasks.
Figure 2 illustrates this four-step loop: the meta-orchestrator mutates the
current incumbent workflow to produce a candidate workflow; agent nodes
executeit; thejudge evaluatestheresultingexecutiontraceandreturnsstructured
feedback with an overall score; and the candidate is archived while the highest-
scoring workflow observed so far is retained as the new incumbent. If the
candidate does not improve the score, the previous incumbent is kept unchanged.
The loop runs for a predefined number of iterations or terminates early when
the judge score reaches 0.9.
3.2.4 Layer 3: Agent Execution
Agents in synthesized workflows are executed by SmolAgent instances: Hugging
Face’s code-generating agents that use Python as their native action language [53].
3In our ScienceAgentBench evaluation, the diversity of tasks meant all workflows were
synthesized via this de novo path. See Section 7.
14Figure 2: Iterative workflow refinement via single-incumbent search. (1) Mutate
Incumbent Workflow — at each iteration, the meta-orchestrator takes the best-
performing workflow observed so far (the incumbent) together with its evaluation
feedback and proposes a single local modification to generate a mutated workflow.
(2) Execute Workflow — each node in the workflow is executed by a SmolAgent
CodeAgent instance. (3) Evaluate Workflow — the judge evaluates the resulting
execution trace across goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality,
and answer plausibility, and returns structured feedback with an overall score.
(4) Archive and Select Incumbent — the evaluated workflow is archived, and the
highest-scoring workflow observed so far is retained as the incumbent for the
next iteration. If the new workflow does not improve the score, the previous
incumbent is kept. The cycle repeats for a predefined number of iterations or
until the judge score exceeds 0.9.
15Execution is Python-centric at the SmolAgent runtime, but non-Python code
such as R can be invoked indirectly through MCP tools or shell commands when
those tools are available. For example, an R-based statistical pipeline can be
containerised as an MCP server, allowing agents to invoke it as a standard tool
call without requiring native R support in the SmolAgent runtime.
Rather than generating JSON or text representations of tool calls, these
agents directly write and execute Python code snippets to invoke MCP-exposed
tools, perform computations, and orchestrate multi-step workflows. This code-as-
actions design is more expressive than schema-constrained JSON tool calls and
has been shown to improve tool-use efficiency and success rates in complex agent
tasks [54]. Concretely, a JSON-based agent calling a docking tool can only pass
parameters that the tool schema anticipates, whereas a code-generating agent
can preprocess inputs, loop over parameter grids, filter intermediate results, and
chain multiple library calls within a single reasoning step — all without requiring
each operation to be pre-registered as a distinct tool.
For scientific discovery, this approach [54] offers concrete advantages. Agents
can perform inline calculations to configure instruments dynamically, for instance,
iterating through a combinatorial search space testing hundreds of parameter
combinations within a single execution step.
Code execution enables native data analysis: agents process raw experimental
outputs directly in python, extracting meaningful signals without intermediate
parsing. Variables serve as reliable information storage, allowing agents to store
computed values, numerical results, and intermediate findings.
This integration of reasoning, computation, and tool orchestration within
executable code enables agents to operate with rigor and precision that scientific
tools demand.
This code execution model further grants agents direct access to the rich
ecosystem of established scientific informatics libraries. Agents can import and
invoke domain-specific tools such as RDKit for cheminformatics and molecular
modeling, BioPython for sequence analysis and structural biology, or scikit-
learn for statistical learning and predictive modeling. By leveraging these
mature, validated libraries within their execution context, agents can compose
sophisticated analytical workflows from tools that the scientific community has
refined over decades.
Mimosa decouples model selection across pipeline stages and supports plug-
gable execution backends, including remote APIs and local inference. Imple-
mentation details, including supported backends and current limitations, are
described in the LLM Configuration paragraph of Section 5.
3.2.5 Layer 4: Evaluation
An LLM-as-a-judge [49] (hereafter, judge) performs offline evaluation of com-
pleted (or prematurely terminated) multi-agent workflow executions to guide the
learning process. This evaluation occurs immediately following the execution of
all agents in a workflow, or upon termination due to error, before any subsequent
iteration begins. We adopt LLM-as-a-judge as a scalable heuristic supervision
16signal, while recognizing an active methodological literature on judge reliability
and bias [55].
The judge assesses performance against four objective criteria:
1. Goal Alignment (0.0-1.0): Measures the extent to which the execution
fulfilled the defined objectives without deviation.
2. Agent Collaboration (0.0-1.0): Assesses the correctness of inter-agent
data flow and error handling.
3. Output Quality (0.0-1.0): Analyzes completeness, formatting, and
structural validity.
4. Answer Plausibility (0.0-1.0): Verifies factual accuracy against ground
truth when available. Otherwise, assesses logical soundness and theoretical
plausibility.
The judge produces structured feedback, citing specific evidence from execu-
tion traces (e.g., JSON state paths, error logs) to justify scores. This feedback is
ingested by the meta-orchestrator, which proposes targeted workflow mutations
as described in Section 3.2.3.
While this judge provides directional signals sufficient for greedy workflow
refinement, it serves exclusively as an internal optimization objective. Whether a
task is actually solved is determined independently by the benchmark’s program-
matic evaluation scripts, which compare agent outputs against gold-standard
results without any reference to judge scores (see Section 4.1.4). The open ques-
tion is not whether the reported Success Rates (SR) are valid — they are, since
they are computed externally — but whether the judge signal is sample-efficient:
i.e., how tightly judge scores correlate with benchmark Success Rate at the
per-task level. Quantifying this correlation is discussed in Section 7.
4 Experiments
4.1 Setup
4.1.1 Benchmarks choice
We evaluate Mimosa on one established benchmark targeting distinct capabilities
along the spectrum of ASR: ScienceAgentBench.
ScienceAgentBench [44] comprises 102 data-driven discoveries tasks ex-
tracted from 44 peer-reviewed publications across four scientific disciplines:
bioinformatics, computational chemistry, geographic information science, and
psychology/cognitive neuroscience.
Each task represents a discrete, well-defined operation within a data-driven
discovery workflow: data preprocessing, model training, or statistical analysis
validated by nine subject matter experts.
17Crucially, the benchmark emphasizes task-level assessment over end-to-end
automation claims, aligning with our objective of demonstrating learning at the
individual task granularity.
The benchmark’s standardized metrics (Valid Execution Rate, Success Rate,
CodeBERTScore) and programmatic evaluation enable rigorous comparison of
workflow variants across iterative refinement cycles. We operate in task mode
(planning layer disabled) to isolate the contribution of the orchestration layer’s
self-improvement mechanism.
4.1.2 Models
Both the meta-orchestrator and judge use claude-opus-4-5-20251101 for work-
flow generation and LLM-as-a-judge for scoring workflow performance.
Agent execution models vary by experiment and are specified in each re-
sults table: (i) GPT-4o (OpenAI API), (ii) DeepSeek-V3.2 (DeepSeek API,
deepseek-chat), (iii) Mistral-Large-2407 (OpenRouter), and (iv) Claude Haiku
(Anthropic API).
4.1.3 Execution Modes
We compare three execution configurations:
Single-Agent: A standalone HuggingFace CodeAgent executes with a
prompt near-identical to those used per-agent in multi-agent workflows, with
access to the full aggregated MCP tool set. This baseline isolates single-model
performance from the effects of multi-agent decomposition.
Multi-Agent (One-Shot): The meta-orchestrator generates a workflow
from scratch without subsequent refinement. This isolates the value of multi-
agent decomposition independent of iterative learning.
Multi-Agent (Iterative-Learning): The meta-orchestrator generates
an initial workflow, then iteratively refines it based on execution feedback.
Refinement runs for up to 10 iterations with early stopping when the judge score
reaches 0.9.
4.1.4 ScienceAgentBench Evaluation
We evaluate Mimosa on all 102 available tasks spanning diverse scientific domains.
We adopt three of the four metrics defined by the benchmark authors:
- Success Rate (SR) is our primary evaluation metric, as it directly measures
whether agents accomplish the underlying scientific objective. SR evaluates
whether task outputs satisfy domain-specific success criteria, determined by
comparing agent predictions against gold-standard results using task-specific
evaluation scripts. Crucially, SR is computed entirely independently of the LLM-
based judge scores that guide workflow refinement internally (Section 3.2.5):
the judge drives the iterative optimization loop, while SR provides external,
ground-truth validation.
- CodeBERTScore (CBS) quantifies semantic similarity between generated
and reference implementations. We compute contextual embeddings using
18CodeBERT, construct a cosine similarity matrix between token representations,
and derive an F1 score via greedy matching.
- Cost tracks cumulative expenditure from LLM API calls during task execu-
tion, reported in USD.
For each task, we execute the following procedure: (1) load task instructions
and associated files, (2) execute the task using Mimosa, (3) transfer generated
artifacts to an isolated evaluation capsule, (4) compute SR using the task-specific
evaluation script, (5) compute CBS against the reference implementation, and
(6) record API costs. All execution occurs within sandboxed containers to ensure
isolation between tasks.
We note a methodological difference with the published ScienceAgentBench
baselines: Chen et al. [44] repeat each task three times and report the best
outcome (selected by maximum SR, then VER, then CBS, then minimum
Cost), whereas Mimosa reports single-execution results. The iterative-learning
configuration partially offsets this asymmetry, as its evolution loop evaluates
up to 10 workflow variants per task and retains the best-performing one. The
single-agent and one-shot configurations carry no such mechanism, making their
comparison against best-of-three baselines conservative. Multi-seed replication
is discussed in Section 7.
For all experiments, Mimosa is operated in task mode, without decomposing
tasks into sub-tasks. We evaluate Mimosa under the three execution modes
defined in Section 4.1.3 (not to be confused with task or goal modes): (1)
single-agent, (2) one-shot multi-agent, and (3) iterative-learning. In all modes,
individual agent nodes are executed as SmolAgent CodeAgent instances.
We emphasize that despite the workflow archive mechanism described in
Section 3.2.3, the diversity of ScienceAgentBench tasks is such that no prior
candidate satisfied the similarity threshold of 0.7 for any evaluated task. Conse-
quently, both one-shot and iterative-learning modes generate workflows de novo
from task prompts alone, without retrieval from the archive. This ensures that re-
ported performance reflects per-task workflow synthesis rather than accumulated
benchmark-specific knowledge. The semantic diversity of ScienceAgentBench
means that the case-based retrieval and mutation pathway — fully implemented
in Mimosa’s meta-orchestration layer — was not exercised in these experiments.
Evaluating this mechanism on tasks with genuine semantic overlap, including
through synthetic task variants, is a natural next step (see Section 7).
SmolAgent’s CodeAgent enables iterative reasoning through its code-based
action space: the agent can generate code that evaluates intermediate results,
detects errors, and makes several attempts all within a single execution trace.
Individual agents are limited to 64 steps when operating as components within
a multi-agent workflow (modes 2 and 3), and 256 steps when operating in
single-agent mode.
In Iterative-learning mode, refinement runs for up to 10 iterations, with early
stopping triggered when the judge score reaches 0.9.
In the single-agent setting, a standalone SmolAgent CodeAgent receives
the full aggregated MCP tool set and the task prompt directly, running in the
same sandboxed execution environment as the multi-agent configurations. This
19mode removes agent decomposition and inter-agent routing, but not tool access,
isolating the contribution of workflow structure from that of tool availability.
We note, however, that this comparison does not control for environment setup:
in all modes, agents are responsible for installing dependencies and configuring
their execution environment, which differs from the pre-configured environments
used in ScienceAgentBench’s reported baselines (see Section 5 for details on this
confound).
4.2 ScienceAgentBench Results
We report our results on ScienceAgentBench in Table 1. Each individual value
(SR, CBS, Cost) is the mean value across all 102 tasks. For single-agent runs, re-
ported costs reflect agent execution alone. For multi-agent and iterative-learning
runs, costs additionally include workflow generation and judge evaluation, both
performed by claude-opus-4-5-20251101. Per-component cost breakdown was
not tracked separately, but meta-orchestrator and judge costs are expected to
be minor relative to agent execution.
Table 1: Performance comparison of Mimosa using different models on Sci-
enceAgentBench.
Mode Model SuccessRate CodeBERT Cost/Task
(SR) (%) (CBS) (%) ($)
GPT-4o 3.8 0.607 0.56
Single Agent DeepSeek-V3.2 38.2 0.898 0.05
(SmolAgent) Mistral-Large-2407 13.5 0.681 1.3
Claude Haiku 4.5 7.8 0.57 1.46
GPT-4o 18.6 0.640 1
Multi-Agent DeepSeek-V3.2 32.4 0.794 0.38
One-shot Mistral-Large-2407 – – –
Claude Haiku 4.5 31.3 0.773 2.2
GPT-4o 21.6 0.721 3.5
Iterative DeepSeek-V3.2 43.1 0.921 1.7
Learning Mistral-Large-2407 – – –
Claude Haiku 4.5 30.3 0.885 7.8
Table 1 reveals distinct architectural sensitivities across model families. The
transition from single-agent to multi-agent configurations produces heteroge-
neous performance trajectories: GPT-4o and Claude Haiku 4.5 demonstrate
approximately 4× success rate improvements (from 3.8% to 18.6% and from
7.8% to 31.3% respectively), while DeepSeek-V3.2 exhibits a different pattern.
Despite a strong single-agent baseline of 38.2%, performance initially degrades
under static multi-agent orchestration to 32.4% before surpassing the baseline
through iterative-learning at 43.1%. The iterative-learning paradigm shows
20model-dependent efficacy. DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves the strongest gains: 33% rela-
tive SR improvement (from 32.4% to 43.1%) and substantial CBS enhancement
(from 0.794 to 0.921), suggesting effective exploitation of evolutionary workflow
optimization. GPT-4o demonstrates moderate iterative-learning gains (15% rela-
tive improvement), while Claude Haiku 4.5 exhibits marginal degradation (from
31.3% to 30.3%), indicating that iterative-learning benefits are not universal
but rather contingent on model-specific architectural priors. Full evaluation of
Mistral-Large-2407 is deferred to a future revision.
Reward gains across iterations. Beyond per-model comparisons, we exam-
ine how workflow performance evolves across successive refinement iterations.
Figure 3 plots the average reward gains that evolution yields. We find
consistent positive gains across iterations 1–8, followed by diminishing returns.
The persistent positive gains demonstrate that each evolution cycle, on average,
refines and enhances workflow performance. Iteration 10, on the other hand,
shows the first negative gain, potentially indicating a performance ceiling of our
current approach.
Figure 3: Reward gains from successive evolution iterations. Average change in
reward relative to the previous iteration with SEM error bars. Data is pooled
across runs from all evaluated models (GPT-4o, DeepSeek-V3.2, Claude Haiku
4.5); per-model breakdowns are discussed in the text.
We note that this curve aggregates reward trajectories across all evaluated
models. As shown in Table 1, models respond heterogeneously to iterative
refinement: DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves substantial gains through evolution (32.4%
21to 43.1% SR), while Claude Haiku 4.5 exhibits marginal degradation (31.3% to
30.3%). The pooled curve therefore represents an average trend that may not
reflect any individual model’s trajectory. Per-model reward gain breakdowns are
left to future work.
5 Discussion
Our results demonstrate the potential of iteratively refining multi-agent workflow
topologies for computational scientific tasks, contributing toward more capable
ASR systems. While our evaluation targets individual computational tasks
rather than the full scientific research cycle, these results establish foundational
capabilities for broader ASR and provide the community with a framework
applicable to a range of scientific computing applications.
Archive retrieval and workflow transfer. While all workflows in this evalu-
ation were generated de novo due to the semantic diversity of ScienceAgentBench
tasks, Mimosa’s case-based retrieval mechanism is fully implemented and offers
a promising pathway for accelerating workflow synthesis. In scientific practice,
researchers routinely encounter tasks that share structural similarities with prior
analyses — for instance, applying the same statistical pipeline to a new dataset,
or adapting a preprocessing workflow to a related organism. The archive retrieval
mechanism is designed precisely for such scenarios, enabling workflow transfer
and mutation rather than repeated synthesis from scratch. Systematic evaluation
of this capability using synthetic, expert-designed task variants represents a
natural extension of the present work (see Section 7).
Average judge reward gain across iteration. The persistent positive gains
across iterations 1–8 (Figure 3) confirm that each evolution cycle, on average,
refines workflow performance. However, diminishing returns after iteration 8 and
the first negative gain at iteration 10 suggest the onset of a performance ceiling.
This saturation is consistent with the expected behaviour of single-incumbent
search, where only the current best workflow is refined at each step and no
alternative candidate workflows are maintained in parallel. Without a diverse
pool of candidates, such a strategy tends to exhaust nearby improvements and
stall — a pattern observed by the Darwin Gödel Machine [39], which similarly
reports performance saturation around iteration 10 when evolution operates
without open-ended exploration. Moving beyond this ceiling requires exploration
mechanisms that maintain multiple workflow populations simultaneously, as
discussed in Section 7.
Architecture interaction insights. The heterogeneous performance trajec-
tories reported in Table 1 challenge the assumption that multi-agent decom-
position is universally beneficial. Whether a model’s capabilities are amplified
or disrupted by hierarchical orchestration appears to depend on its underlying
instruction-following robustness. For models with weaker single-agent baselines
22(GPT-4o, Claude Haiku 4.5), shorter-horizon subgoals introduced by multi-agent
decomposition appear to compensate for instruction-following limitations in
the HuggingFace CodeAgent framework. In contrast, DeepSeek-V3.2’s strong
single-agent performance suggests robust instruction-following that is temporar-
ily disrupted by static multi-agent coordination but ultimately benefits from
adaptive iterative-learning.
The iterative-learning paradigm likewise reveals model-specific sensitivities.
Evolutionary workflow optimization yields substantial gains only for models
with sufficient instruction-following robustness to exploit hierarchical feedback
signals; for others, the additional computational overhead is not justified. We
postulate that these patterns reflect differences in pretraining and reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) regimes that shape each model’s capacity
to leverage orchestration structure. The results suggest that optimal ASR
architectures must be designed with model capabilities in mind rather than
applied uniformly.
Single-agent baseline gap and environment confound. Our single-agent
results underperform ScienceAgentBench reported baselines (e.g., GPT-4o: 3.8%
vs. 22.6% SR). We attribute this gap primarily to a difference in execution
environment: ScienceAgentBench baselines operate within pre-configured envi-
ronments with all required dependencies installed, whereas Mimosa delegates
full environment setup — including package installation, path resolution, and
dependency management — to the agents themselves. This design choice, consis-
tent with Mimosa’s goal of end-to-end autonomy, means that the improvement
observed when moving from single-agent to multi-agent configurations reflects
both more robust environment handling by specialized agents and the benefits of
task decomposition, with the relative contribution of each factor not yet isolated.
Thisconfounddoesnotinvalidatetheiterative-learningresults, whichimprove
over the multi-agent one-shot baseline under identical environment conditions.
However, it means that the absolute single-agent–to–multi-agent gap overstates
the contribution of workflow decomposition alone. In contrast, the one-shot to
iterative-learning comparison is unconfounded, as both modes share identical
environment conditions. A controlled comparison using pre-configured single-
agent environments is needed to disentangle these factors. That said, the
iterative-learning results with DeepSeek-V3.2 compare favorably to the best
previously reported scores on ScienceAgentBench [44] (noting the evaluation
asymmetry discussed above: single-execution vs. best-of-three), suggesting that
workflow evolution provides genuine improvements beyond environment handling.
LLMConfiguration. Mimosadecouplesmodelselectionacrosspipelinestages:
planning, prompt synthesis, workflow generation, and post-hoc evaluation each
expose independent configuration fields. Planning, generation, and evalua-
tion stages route through a shared LiteLLM wrapper (LLMProvider), while
executor agents are instantiated via Hugging Face SmolAgents with pluggable
backends—LiteLLM, MLX (for Apple Silicon M1–M5), Hugging Face Inference
23Client, or OpenAI-compatible APIs. This architecture supports heterogeneous
execution (remote APIs alongside local inference), though all agents within a
single workflow currently share one executor model/backend. Native Ollama
and vLLM adapters are not yet implemented.
Performance-cost tradeoffs. DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves the strongest iterative-
learning results (43.1% SR) at $1.7 per task; a competitive performance at
half GPT-4o’s cost and one fifth of Claude Haiku 4.5. However, efficiency
patterns diverge sharply: DeepSeek-V3.2 single-agent mode offers exceptional
value ($0.05/task, 38.2% SR), while its iterative-learning cost increases 34×for
a 4.9 percentage-point absolute SR gain (∼13% relative improvement). GPT-4o
demonstrates the steepest efficiency curve in multi-agent orchestration, yielding
4.9×SR improvement (3.8% to 18.6%) at merely 1.8×cost increase ($0.56 to
$1.0). These patterns suggest optimal resource allocation depends on model-
architecture pairing rather than universal prescriptions.
Potential implications for resource efficiency. A further consideration
concerns the resource efficiency of current ASR approaches. The prevailing
emphasis on scaling to ever-larger, more expensive reasoning models carries
substantial environmental and financial costs. On ScienceAgentBench, the best
previously reported result uses OpenAI o1-preview with Self-Debug, achieving
42.2% SR—but at a per-token cost of $15/$60 per million input/output tokens
at the time of the benchmark, which the benchmark authors themselves note
represents “more than 10 times the cost of other LLMs” [44]. Mimosa achieves a
comparable 43.1% SR using DeepSeek-V3.2, whose per-token cost ($0.56/$1.68
per million input/output tokens) is approximately 27×lower on input and 36×
lower on output than o1-preview. While Mimosa’s iterative workflow consumes
more total tokens per task, yielding a higher per-task cost ($1.7 vs. $0.64), this
overhead is a property of the current greedy search strategy rather than an
intrinsic architectural limitation. Additionally, Mimosa handles full environment
setup—including dependency installation and path resolution—as part of each
task execution, an overhead absent from benchmark baselines that operate in
pre-configured environments (Section 5).
More broadly, multi-agent architectures offer a potential pathway toward
frugal scientific AI: by decomposing workflows into specialized subtasks, future
systems might distribute cognitive load across smaller, cheaper models while
leveraging established domain-specific tools refined over decades of scientific
computing. Whether such decomposition can systematically match frontier
reasoning model performance at substantially reduced computational and envi-
ronmental cost remains an important open question. By offloading execution and
iterative optimization to such platforms, researchers can devote more attention
to higher-level scientific activities—experimental design, hypothesis generation,
interpretation, and critical evaluation—while retaining the judgment and con-
textual understanding required to steer and assess automated processes.
Conversely, a systematic evaluation of recent high-capability reasoning models
24within Mimosa’s iterative-learning framework would be equally informative.
The strong performance ceiling observed with DeepSeek-V3.2 (a non-reasoning
model) suggests that models with native chain-of-thought capabilities may yield
further gains, particularly on tasks where single-step agent reasoning currently
limits workflow progress. Such evaluations represent a natural complement to
this direction: understanding both the upper bound achievable with frontier
models and the lower bound of model cost at which competitive performance
is maintained will be essential for guiding practical deployment of AI-assisted
scientific research.
6 Conclusion
We presented Mimosa, a framework toward autonomous scientific research that
adapts to available tools and iteratively refines multi-agent workflows for compu-
tational scientific tasks. Unlike static multi-agent systems, Mimosa combines
adaptability during workflow evolution with predictability once refinement con-
verges, yielding workflows that are both empirically optimized and stable for
reuse.
Mimosa provides the scientific community a framework and toolset for helping
conduct in-depth computational research, such as data analysis, statistical
modeling, and simulation workflows. Both Mimosa and Toolomics are released
as open-source software under the Apache License 2.0.
On the ScienceAgentBench benchmark, we achieved 43% success rate us-
ing DeepSeek-V3.2, validating the core hypothesis that evolving workflows can
enhance autonomous research capabilities of agentic systems. The observed
performance variance across models and the differing returns across configura-
tions further reveal informative architecture-model interactions, suggesting that
optimal ASR architectures must be designed with model capabilities in mind.
We discuss remaining open questions and concrete directions for future work in
Section 7.
More broadly, Mimosa advocates a paradigm shift in scientific AI: from
brittle, expert-designed pipelines to adaptive multi-agent frameworks that learn
from experience. Population-based or open-ended evolutionary strategies remain
a natural direction for future work.
7 Limitations and Future work
We identify several directions where the current evaluation can be extended, and
outline concrete plans for each:
- Judge feedback signal refinement remains an important limitation: the
judge provides directional but coarse-grained feedback, and LLM-as-a-judge
systems are known to exhibit biases including position bias, self-preference bias,
and sensitivity to evaluation framing [49, 55]. Crucially, this concern pertains to
the efficiency of the search process, not to the validity of reported results, since
25Success Rate is evaluated by benchmark-provided scripts entirely independently
of judge scoring (Section 3.2.5). The SR improvements observed under iterative
learning (Table 1) provide indirect evidence that the judge’s directional signal is
sufficient to guide evolution toward better task outcomes. A key next step is to
quantify this correlation and to strengthen reliability through judge calibration,
cross-model adjudication, and direct validation against benchmark outcomes.
- Cross-model configuration for meta-orchestrator and judge: A related
aspect worth noting is that the current implementation uses the same model
for both workflow proposal (orchestrator) and execution evaluation (judge).
While these roles operate on distinct outputs — the meta-orchestrator proposes
a workflow structure, while the judge evaluates the resulting agent execution
trace — it remains an open question whether using the same model introduces
self-reinforcing optimization tendencies. Cross-model configurations, where
orchestration and evaluation are handled by architecturally distinct models, offer
a natural avenue to investigate this.
- Cross-task generalization: While the workflow archive enables retrieval of
prior workflows for similar tasks (Section 3.2.3), the meta-orchestrator does not
yet extract abstract design principles from past experience — such as which
mutation types, agent configurations, or tool combinations tend to succeed across
task families. Learning such generalizable patterns would enable more efficient
exploration of the workflow search space and represents a prerequisite for true
meta-learning.
- From greedy refinement to open-ended exploration: As discussed in Sec-
tion 5, the current single-incumbent search strategy tends to plateau after
approximately eight iterations, motivating the adoption of population-based
exploration mechanisms.
- Mutation and judge optimization: Analyzing which mutation types most
frequently drive score improvements, and tuning judge criterion weightings and
the early-stopping threshold, offer straightforward avenues to improve search
efficiency—though the heterogeneous model responses reported in Table 1 suggest
these optima may themselves be model-dependent.
- Multi-seed replication and per-model analysis: All reported results reflect
single-execution runs. Replicating all configurations with three independent seeds
is needed to establish variance estimates and strengthen comparisons against
published best-of-three baselines. Similarly, per-model reward gain breakdowns
would reveal whether the saturation pattern observed in Figure 3 is universal or
model-specific.
- Single-agent baseline and environment setup: Mimosa delegates environ-
ment setup entirely to agents, consistent with its goal of end-to-end autonomy,
unlike ScienceAgentBench baselines which operate in pre-configured environ-
ments. This difference means the apparent benefit of multi-agent decomposition
includes contributions from improved environment handling. A systematic failure
categorization of single-agent logs and a controlled rerun with pre-configured
environments are needed to isolate the true contribution of workflow decomposi-
tion from improved environment handling. This analysis is planned alongside
the multi-seed replication described in Section 4.1.4.
26- Archive retrieval scope: The case-based retrieval mechanism is fully imple-
mented and integrated into Mimosa’s meta-orchestration layer, enabling new
workflows to be bootstrapped from semantically similar prior tasks. The diversity
of ScienceAgentBench tasks meant that no task pair exceeded the 0.7 similarity
threshold during evaluation, so all reported results reflect de novo workflow
synthesis. This represents an opportunity rather than a limitation: validating
whether retrieval and mutation of prior workflows accelerates convergence or
improves performance over de novo synthesis is a natural next step. We are
developing a synthetic evaluation dataset (described below) to systematically
test this capability.
Future work will be focused on the following directions:
- Investigating evaluation methodologies that yield informative judge feed-
back signals, enabling reliable performance tracking and theoretically grounded
optimization directions.
This includes exploring cross-model meta-orchestrator–judge configurations
to evaluate whether self-reinforcing tendencies arise in workflow optimization.
- Incorporating domain-grounded skill acquisition [41, 56]: extracting tool co-
occurrence patterns and canonical computational step sequences from published
methods sections, tool documentation, and community-maintained protocols
to bootstrap the workflow archive with domain-informed templates, reducing
reliance on de novo synthesis for well-established analytical pipelines.
- Constructing a persistent memory architecture that encodes not only suc-
cessful workflow patterns but also structured failure diagnostics—such as re-
curring error types, problematic tool–task associations, and ineffective agent
configurations—enabling the meta-orchestrator to avoid known-bad design
choices and accelerate convergence on novel tasks.
- Adopting open-ended strategies that maintain multiple workflow popula-
tions simultaneously, replacing single-incumbent refinement with exploration
mechanisms that avoid premature convergence.
- Evaluating Mimosa on lightweight (<70B) open-source models to determine
whether task decomposition enables competitive performance at substantially
reduced computational and environmental cost.
- Reproducibility evaluation: Mimosa’s fully logged, archiveable execution
traces and tool-agnostic workflow design establish conditions that could, in
future work, support the independent replication of computational analyses from
published studies. This capability is not evaluated in the present work, which
focuses instead on individual scientific computing tasks. A natural next step is
thereforetodesignacontrolledstudyinwhichMimosa attemptstoindependently
replicate the computational analyses of published findings, assessing both the
feasibility of end-to-end reproduction and the fidelity of reproduced results
against original outputs.
278 Author Contributions
M.L., T.J. and L.-F.N. conceptualized the study. M.L., T.J. and L.-F.N. devel-
oped the methodology. M.L., T.J., B.N, and M.F. implemented the software.
M.L., T.J., E.D. and L.-F.N. tested the method across application cases. L.-F.N.
and E.D. acquired funding. L.-F.N. supervised the project. M.L., T.J. and
L.-F.N. wrote the original draft of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and
edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
9 Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the French government through the France 2030
investment plan via the MetaboLinkAI bilateral project (ANR-24-CE93-0012-01
and SNSF 10002786), the 3IA Côte d’Azur programme (ANR-23-IACL-0001),
ANR-22-CPJ2-0048-01, and ANR-22-CE29-0026-03 (DREAMY). Additional
support was provided through the UCAJEDI Investments in the Future project
(ANR-15-IDEX-01). The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or manuscript preparation.
10 Ethics Statement
This study did not involve human participants, animal subjects, or the use of
personal data. All datasets and benchmarks are publicly available and used in
accordance with their respective licenses.
Use of AI-assisted technologies. During the preparation of this work, the
authors used large language models (including tools from Anthropic, DeepSeek,
Google, Mistral, and OpenAI) to accelerate software development and to improve
the readability and style of the manuscript. The use of LLMs as components of
the Mimosa framework itself is documented in Sections 3 and 4. All AI-generated
suggestions for code and text were critically reviewed, verified, and edited by
the authors. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the published
article.
11 Competing interests
F.G. is cofounder and co-scientific advisor of :probabl. All other authors declare
no competing interests.
References
[1] Eva M. Campo, Sadasivan Shankar, Alexander S. Szalay, and Robert J.
Hanisch. Now Is the Time to Build a National Data Ecosystem for Materials
28Science and Chemistry Research Data. ACS Omega, 7(16):13398–13402,
April 2022.
[2] AlbertoCambrosio, JonahCampbell, EtienneVignola-Gagné, PeterKeating,
Bertrand R. Jordan, and Pascale Bourret. ‘Overcoming the Bottleneck’:
Knowledge Architectures for Genomic Data Interpretation in Oncology. In
Sabina Leonelli and Niccolò Tempini, editors, Data Journeys in the Sciences,
pages 305–327. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020.
[3] Bonnie Berger and Yun William Yu. Navigating bottlenecks and trade-offs
in genomic data analysis. Nature Reviews Genetics, 24(4):235–250, April
2023.
[4] Yolanda Gil, Mark Greaves, James Hendler, and Haym Hirsh. Amplify
scientific discovery with artificial intelligence. Science, 346(6206):171–172,
2014.
[5] Monya Baker. 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature,
533(7604):452–454, May 2016.
[6] John P. A. Ioannidis. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False.
PLoS Medicine, 2(8):e124, 2005.
[7] Brett K. Beaulieu-Jones and Casey S. Greene. Reproducibility of computa-
tional workflows is automated using continuous analysis. Nature Biotech-
nology, 35(4):342–346, 2017.
[8] Gary Tom, Stefan P. Schmid, Sterling G. Baird, Yang Cao, Kourosh Darvish,
HanHao, StanleyLo, SergioPablo-García, EllaM.Rajaonson, MartaSkreta,
Naruki Yoshikawa, Samantha Corapi, Gun Deniz Akkoc, Felix Strieth-
Kalthoff, Martin Seifrid, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Self-Driving Laboratories
for Chemistry and Materials Science. Chemical Reviews, 124(16):9633–9732,
2024. PMID: 39137296.
[9] Tao Song, Man Luo, Xiaolong Zhang, Linjiang Chen, Yan Huang, Jiaqi
Cao, Qing Zhu, Daobin Liu, Baicheng Zhang, Gang Zou, Guoqing Zhang,
Fei Zhang, Weiwei Shang, Yao Fu, Jun Jiang, and Yi Luo. A Multiagent-
Driven Robotic AI Chemist Enabling Autonomous Chemical Research On
Demand. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 147(15):12534–12545,
2025. PMID: 40056128.
[10] Jie Huang and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Towards Reasoning in Large
Language Models: A Survey, May 2023. arXiv:2212.10403 [cs].
[11] Jiabin Tang, Lianghao Xia, Zhonghang Li, and Chao Huang. AI-Researcher:
Autonomous Scientific Innovation, May 2025. arXiv:2505.18705 [cs].
[12] Lianhao Zhou, Hongyi Ling, Cong Fu, Yepeng Huang, Michael Sun, Wendi
Yu, Xiaoxuan Wang, Xiner Li, Xingyu Su, Junkai Zhang, Xiusi Chen,
Chenxing Liang, Xiaofeng Qian, Heng Ji, Wei Wang, Marinka Zitnik, and
29Shuiwang Ji. Autonomous Agents for Scientific Discovery: Orchestrating
Scientists, Language, Code, and Physics, 2025.
[13] Yufeng Du, Minyang Tian, Srikanth Ronanki, Subendhu Rongali, Sravan
Bodapati, Aram Galstyan, Azton Wells, Roy Schwartz, Eliu A Huerta, and
Hao Peng. Context Length Alone Hurts LLM Performance Despite Perfect
Retrieval, 2025.
[14] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilac-
qua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the Middle: How Language
Models Use Long Contexts, 2024. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2024.
[15] Gregory Sliwoski, Sandeepkumar Kothiwale, Jens Meiler, and Edward W.
Lowe. Computational Methods in Drug Discovery. Pharmacological Reviews,
66(1):334–395, 2014.
[16] Anastasiia V. Sadybekov and Vsevolod Katritch. Computational approaches
streamlining drug discovery. Nature, 616(7958):673–685, 2023.
[17] Anthropic. Model Context Protocol Specification. https://
modelcontextprotocol.io, 2024. Open standard for connecting AI as-
sistants to external tools and data sources.
[18] Jiaqi Wei, Yuejin Yang, Xiang Zhang, Yuhan Chen, Xiang Zhuang,
Zhangyang Gao, Dongzhan Zhou, Guangshuai Wang, Zhiqiang Gao, Jun-
tai Cao, Zijie Qiu, Ming Hu, Chenglong Ma, Shixiang Tang, Junjun He,
Chunfeng Song, Xuming He, Qiang Zhang, Chenyu You, Shuangjia Zheng,
Ning Ding, Wanli Ouyang, Nanqing Dong, Yu Cheng, Siqi Sun, Lei Bai,
and Bowen Zhou. From AI for Science to Agentic Science: A Survey on
Autonomous Scientific Discovery, October 2025. arXiv:2508.14111 [cs].
[19] Haoxuan Zhang, Ruochi Li, Yang Zhang, Ting Xiao, Jiangping Chen,
Junhua Ding, and Haihua Chen. The Evolving Role of Large Language
Models in Scientific Innovation: Evaluator, Collaborator, and Scientist, July
2025. arXiv:2507.11810 [cs].
[20] Yubin Kim, Ken Gu, Chanwoo Park, Chunjong Park, Samuel Schmidgall,
A. Ali Heydari, Yao Yan, Zhihan Zhang, Yuchen Zhuang, Mark Malhotra,
Paul Pu Liang, Hae Won Park, Yuzhe Yang, Xuhai Xu, Yilun Du, Shwetak
Patel, Tim Althoff, Daniel McDuff, and Xin Liu. Towards a Science of
Scaling Agent Systems, December 2025. arXiv:2512.08296 [cs].
[21] Anton Bulle Labate, Valesca Moura de Sousa, Sandro Rama Fiorini,
Leonardo Guerreiro Azevedo, Raphael Melo Thiago, and Viviane Torres
da Silva. Solving Context Window Overflow in AI Agents, 2025.
[22] Zehong Wang, Fang Wu, Hongru Wang, Xiangru Tang, Bolian Li, Zhenfei
Yin, Yijun Ma, Yiyang Li, Weixiang Sun, Xiusi Chen, and Yanfang Ye.
30Why Reasoning Fails to Plan: A Planning-Centric Analysis of Long-Horizon
Decision Making in LLM Agents, 2026.
[23] Alexander V. Tobias and Adam Wahab. Autonomous ’self-driving’ labora-
tories: a review of technology and policy implications. Royal Society Open
Science, 12(7):250646, July 2025.
[24] Nguyen Xuan-Vu, Daniel Armstrong, Milena Wehrbach, Andres M. Bran,
Zlatko Jončev, and Philippe Schwaller. Synthelite: Chemist-aligned
and feasibility-aware synthesis planning with LLMs, December 2025.
arXiv:2512.16424 [cs].
[25] Bruno Jacob, Khushbu Agarwal, Marcel Baer, Peter Rice, and Simone
Raugei. Beyond Protein Language Models: An Agentic LLM Framework
for Mechanistic Enzyme Design, November 2025. arXiv:2511.19423 [q-bio].
[26] Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. MLAgentBench:
Evaluating Language Agents on Machine Learning Experimentation, April
2024. arXiv:2310.03302 [cs].
[27] Yunxiang Zhang, Muhammad Khalifa, Shitanshu Bhushan, Grant D. Mur-
phy, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Jaekyeom Kim, Moontae Lee, Honglak Lee,
and Lu Wang. MLRC-Bench: Can Language Agents Solve Machine Learning
Research Challenges?, October 2025. arXiv:2504.09702 [cs].
[28] InternAgent Team, Bo Zhang, Shiyang Feng, Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan,
Runmin Ma, Yusong Hu, Zhiyin Yu, Xiaohan He, Songtao Huang, Shaowei
Hou, Zheng Nie, Zhilong Wang, Jinyao Liu, Tianshuo Peng, Peng Ye,
Dongzhan Zhou, Shufei Zhang, Xiaosong Wang, Yilan Zhang, Meng Li,
Zhongying Tu, Xiangyu Yue, Wangli Ouyang, Bowen Zhou, and Lei Bai.
InternAgent: When Agent Becomes the Scientist – Building Closed-Loop
System from Hypothesis to Verification, July 2025. arXiv:2505.16938 [cs].
[29] Christoph Riedl. Emergent Coordination in Multi-Agent Language Models,
2025.
[30] Yaolun Zhang, Xiaogeng Liu, and Chaowei Xiao. MetaAgent: Automatically
Constructing Multi-Agent Systems Based on Finite State Machines, 2025.
[31] Anthropic. How we built our multi-agent research system, June 2025.
[32] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated Design of Agentic
Systems, March 2025. arXiv:2408.08435 [cs].
[33] Yu Shang, Yu Li, Keyu Zhao, Likai Ma, Jiahe Liu, Fengli Xu, and Yong
Li. AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
arXiv:2410.06153.
31[34] Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii
Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. GPTSwarm: Language Agents as
Optimizable Graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2024. arXiv:2402.16823.
[35] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and De-
qing Yang. EvoAgent: Towards Automatic Multi-Agent Generation via
Evolutionary Algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14228, 2024.
[36] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero,
and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement via
Prompt Evolution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2024. arXiv:2309.16797.
[37] Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan,
Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and Yujiu Yang. Connecting Large Language
Models with Evolutionary Algorithms Yields Powerful Prompt Optimizers.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[38] Alex Sheng and Shankar Padmanabhan. Self-Programming Artificial
Intelligence Using Code-Generating Language Models, February 2023.
arXiv:2205.00167 [cs].
[39] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin
GodelMachine: Open-EndedEvolutionofSelf-ImprovingAgents, September
2025. arXiv:2505.22954 [cs].
[40] Zixuan Ke, Austin Xu, Yifei Ming, Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Ryan Chin, Caiming
Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. MAS-ZERO: Designing Multi-Agent Systems with
Zero Supervision, December 2025. arXiv:2505.14996 [cs].
[41] Xu Huang, Junwu Chen, Yuxing Fei, Zhuohan Li, Philippe Schwaller, and
Gerbrand Ceder. CASCADE: Cumulative Agentic Skill Creation through
Autonomous Development and Evolution, December 2025. arXiv:2512.23880
[cs].
[42] Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, Chris Lu,
Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI Scientist-v2: Workshop-
LevelAutomatedScientificDiscoveryviaAgenticTreeSearch. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.08066, 2025.
[43] Ludovico Mitchener, Jon M. Laurent, Benjamin Tenmann, Siddharth
Narayanan, Geemi P. Wellawatte, Andrew White, Lorenzo Sani, and
Samuel G. Rodriques. BixBench: a Comprehensive Benchmark for LLM-
based Agents in Computational Biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00096,
2025.
[44] Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Bo-
tao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi
32Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui
Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. ScienceAgentBench:
Toward Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for Data-Driven Scientific
Discovery. arXiv preprint, 2025.
[45] Rauno Arike, Elizabeth Donoway, Henning Bartsch, and Marius Hobbhahn.
Technical Report: Evaluating Goal Drift in Language Model Agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.02709, 2025.
[46] JunhaoZheng, ChengmingShi, XidiCai, QiukeLi, DuzhenZhang, Chenxing
Li, Dong Yu, and Qianli Ma. Lifelong Learning of Large Language Model
based Agents: A Roadmap, January 2026. arXiv:2501.07278 [cs].
[47] Ken Gu, Ruoxi Shang, Ruien Jiang, Keying Kuang, Richard-John Lin,
Donghe Lyu, Yue Mao, Youran Pan, Teng Wu, Jiaqian Yu, Yikun Zhang,
Tianmai M. Zhang, Lanyi Zhu, Mike A. Merrill, Jeffrey Heer, and Tim
Althoff. BLADE: Benchmarking Language Model Agents for Data-Driven
Science, November 2025. arXiv:2408.09667 [cs].
[48] Muhammad Ahmed Mohsin, Muhammad Umer, Ahsan Bilal, Zeeshan
Memon, Muhammad Ibtsaam Qadir, Sagnik Bhattacharya, Hassan Rizwan,
Abhiram R. Gorle, Maahe Zehra Kazmi, Nukhba Amir, Ali Subhan, Muham-
mad Usman Rafique, Zihao He, Pulkit Mehta, Muhammad Ali Jamshed,
and John M. Cioffi. On the Fundamental Limits of LLMs at Scale, 2026.
[49] LianminZheng, Wei-LinChiang, YingSheng, Siyuan Zhuang, ZhanghaoWu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging
LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. arXiv:2306.05685.
[50] Ilche Georgievski and Marco Aiello. HTN planning: Overview, comparison,
and beyond. Artificial Intelligence, 222:124–156, 2015.
[51] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Shenao Wang, and Haoyu Wang. Model Con-
text Protocol (MCP): Landscape, Security Threats, and Future Research
Directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23278, 2025.
[52] LangChain, Inc. LangGraph: Build resilient language agents as graphs.
https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph, 2024.
[53] Aymeric Roucher, Albert Villanova del Moral, Thomas Wolf, Leandro von
Werra, and Erik Kaunismäki. ‘smolagents‘: a smol library to build great
agentic systems. https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents, 2025.
[54] Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li,
Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM
Agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
arXiv:2402.01030.
33[55] Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin
Xu, WeiLi, YinghanShen, ShengjieMa, HonghaoLiu, YuanzhuoWang, Jian
Guo, et al. A Survey on LLM-as-a-Judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594,
2024.
[56] Renjun Xu and Yang Yan. Agent Skills for Large Language Models: Ar-
chitecture, Acquisition, Security, and the Path Forward. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.12430, 2026.
12 Appendix
12.1 Deployed MCP tools on Toolomics
Below configuration file lists the MCP tools available to agents across all experi-
ments. We enabled a core subset for file manipulation (PDF, CSV, text), code
execution (Python, shell), and image analysis, while disabling specialized tools
(web search, browser automation, molecular structure recognition) to constrain
the action space and ensure better reproducibility.
Listing 1: The configuration file that list the MCP tools available to agents
across all experiments
1 [
2 {
3 " path ": " mcp_host / m c p _ s e a r c h / server . py " ,
4 " port ": 5000 ,
5 " enabled ": false
6 } ,
7 {
8 " path ": " mcp_host / memory / server . py " ,
9 " port ": 5001 ,
10 " enabled ": false
11 } ,
12 {
13 " path ": " mcp_host / pdf / server . py " ,
14 " port ": 5002 ,
15 " enabled ": true
16 } ,
17 {
18 " path ": " mcp_host / html / server . py " ,
19 " port ": 5003 ,
20 " enabled ": false
21 } ,
22 {
23 " path ": " mcp_host / g ra p h_ ra g / server . py " ,
24 " port ": 5004 ,
25 " enabled ": false
26 } ,
27 {
28 " path ": " port ": 5005 ,
30 " enabled ": false
" mcp_host / browser / server . py " ,
29 3431 } ,
32 {
33 " path ": " mcp_host / i m a g e _ a n a l y s i s / server . py " ,
34 " port ": 5006 ,
35 " enabled ": true
36 } ,
37 {
38 " path ": " mcp_host / csv / server . py " ,
39 " port ": 5007 ,
40 " enabled ": true
41 } ,
42 {
43 " path ": " mcp_host / t x t _ e d i t o r / server . py " ,
44 " port ": 5008 ,
45 " enabled ": true
46 } ,
47 {
48 " path ": " mcp_host / p y t h o n _ e d i t o r / server . py " ,
49 " port ": 5009 ,
50 " enabled ": true
51 } ,
52 {
53 " path ": " mcp_host / Rscript / docker - compose . yml " ,
54 " port ": 5010 ,
55 " enabled ": false
56 } ,
57 {
58 " path ": " mcp_host / shell / docker - compose . yml " ,
59 " port ": 5011 ,
60 " enabled ": true
61 } ,
62 {
63 " path ":
→ " mcp_host / browser / searxng / docker - compose . yml " ,
64 " port ": 5012 ,
65 " enabled ": false
66 } ,
67 {
68 " path ": " mcp_host / decimer / docker - compose . yml " ,
69 " port ": 5013 ,
70 " enabled ": false
71 }
72 ]
3512.2 Statistical analysis of Workflow evolution rewards
Figure 4: Statistical validation of evolution efficacy. (a) Mean gain by cohort
with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. All cohorts (2–9) except cohort 10 show
significant positive gains (green bars). (b) Probability of improvement (green)
versus regression (red) at each transition. Early transitions show improvement
rates >50%, while transitions 8→9 and 9→10 favor regression. (c) Permutation
test distribution vs observed mean gain (red line). The observed gain significantly
exceeds the null distribution (p < 0.0001), confirming improvement is not due to
random chance. (d) Effect size (Cohen’s d) by cohort. Cohorts 2–9 achieve large
effect sizes (d > 0.8), with cohort 4 showing the strongest effect (d = 2.75). All
statistical tests are computed on pooled data across models; per-model analyses
are deferred to a future revision.
3612.3 Prompts for Mimosa
12.3.1 Workflow generation system prompt
System prompt used with Claude Opus to generate multi-agent workflows, used
during evaluation for generation of multi-agent workflow both in one-shot mode
and iterative refinement (learning) mode.
Listing 2: The system prompt used for the workflow generation
1 You are a world - class workflow ar c hi t ec t s p e c i a l i z i n g in
→ creating robust , multi - agent systems using L an g Gr a ph
→ and a custom ‘ SmolAgent ‘ library . Your primary
→ function is to analyze user requests and generate
→ complete , e x e c u t a b l e Python code for a multi - agent
→ workflow that solves the given task .
2
3 ## 1. Core P r i n c i p l e s
4
5 ### A . Task D e c o m p o s i t i o n : The " Divide and Conquer " Mandate
6 - ** Atomic Agents **: You must break down complex problems
→ into the smallest , single - purpose agents .
7 - ** One Agent , One Job **: Can you describe the agent ’ s
→ r e s p o n s i b i l i t y in 5 words or less ?
8 Good : " Fetch web search results "
9 Bad : " Research topic and generate report "
10 - ** F u n c t i o n a l B o u n d a r i e s **: D ec o mp o se tasks along natural
→ f u n c t i o n a l lines . For example , a task to " research a
→ topic and create a chart " requires at least two
→ agents : one for research and one for charting .
11
12 ### B . State - Driven , R es i li e nt Routing
13 - ** C o n d i t i o n a l Logic **: All workflow br an c hi n g must be
→ handled by external c o n d i t i o n a l routing f u nc t io ns
→ that inspect the ‘ WorkflowState ‘. Agents t h e m s e l v e s
→ are blind to the overall workflow .
14 - ** B u l l e t p r o o f Error Handling **: Every agent node must
→ have a plan for failure . Im p le me n t robust retry and
→ fallback paths .
15 - ** I n t e l l i g e n t Retries **: Design routing that can
→ b ac kt r ac k to earlier agents if a d o w n s t r e a m failure
→ is caused by poor upstream data . For example , if a
→ ‘ code_executor ‘ agent fails because a ‘ researcher ‘
→ agent provided a bad code snippet , the workflow
→ should route back to the ‘ researcher ‘.
16
17 ### C . Agent Design
18 - ** Focused Prompts **: Agent i n s t r u c t i o n s must be
→ domain - specific , d e ta il i ng the task , input / output
→ format , and m an d at or y c o m p l e t i o n keywords .
19 - ** C o m p l e t i o n Keywords **: Agents ** MUST ** signal their
→ status by ending their response with a specific
→ keyword phrase . This is how your routing fu n ct i on s
→ will d e te rm i ne the next step . Use keywords like
→ ‘ SUCCESS : ‘ , ‘ FAILURE : ‘ , ‘ RETRY : ‘ , or ‘ FALLBACK : ‘.
20
21 22
## 2. T e ch ni c al S p e c i f i c a t i o n
3723 ### Provided Context ( Do NOT r e de cl a re these )
24 The fo l lo wi n g c o m p o n e n t s are pre - loaded in the e xe c ut io n
→ e n v i r o n m e n t . You must use them as - is .
25
26 | C om p on e nt | D e s c r i p t i o n
→
→ |
27 | - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - |
→- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
→ |
28 | ‘ WorkflowState ‘ | The ‘ TypedDict ‘ for graph state .
→ You cannot modify its schema . |
29 | ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ | Class to create agent in st a nc e s .
→ ‘ S m o l A g e n t F a c t o r y ( name , prompt , tools ) ‘ |
30 | ‘ W o r k f l o w N o d e F a c t o r y ‘ | Class to create graph nodes .
→ ‘ c r e a t e _ a g e n t _ n o d e ( a g e n t _ i n s t a n c e ) ‘ |
31 | ‘ master_router ‘ | Routing function that based on the
→ agent response will either return one of
→ ‘[" ne x t_ no d e " , " r e t r y _ n o d e " , " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e " , END ] ‘ |
32 | ‘* _TOOLS ‘ | Pre - defined tool packages ( e . g . ,
→ ‘ BROWSER_MCP ‘ , ‘ FILESYSTEM_MCP ‘ , etc ..) . |
33
34 ### Workflow State Schema
35
36 ‘‘‘ python
37 # This is the state object passed between all nodes . It is
→ PRE - DEFINED .
38 class W o r k f l o w S t a t e ( Ty p ed Di c t ) :
39 s te p _n am e : List [ str ] # History of node names
→ visited
40 answers : List [ str ] # History of raw text
→ r es po n se s from agents
41 success : List [ bool ] # History of task success
→ flags
42 ‘‘‘
43
44 ### Master router
45
46
47 The master router i n t e r p r e t s agent c o m p l e t i o n signals and
→ d e t e r m i n e s workflow t r a n s i t i o n s . It enforces a
→ strict contract between agents and the graph . It is
→ already defined .
48
49 ** Router S ig na t ur e :**
50 ‘‘‘ python
51 def m a s t e r _ r o u t e r ( state : W o r k f l o w S t a t e ) ->
→ Literal [" n ex t _n o de " , " r e t r y _ n o d e " , " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e " ,
→ END ]
52 ‘‘‘
53
55
57 54 ** Routing Logic :**
56 | Agent Status | Router Returns | Meaning |
| - - - - - - - - - - - - -| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -| - - - - - - - - -|
58 | SUCCESS | " n ex t _n o de " | Task completed , proceed to next
→ agent |
3859 | RETRY | " r e t r y _ n o d e " | R e c o v e r a b l e error , re - execute
→ current agent |
60 | FALLBACK | " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e " | Missing / bad input , return
→ to previous or fallback agent |
61 | FAILURE | END | U n r e c o v e r a b l e error , t er m in at e workflow |
62 | Invalid format | END | Protocol violation , te r mi na t e
→ with error |
63
64 ** Agent Response Contract :**
65 Agents MUST end their response by calling f i n a l _ a n s w e r ()
→ with a JSON string c o n t a i n i n g :
66
67 status : One of [" SUCCESS " , " RETRY " , " FALLBACK " , " FAILURE "]
68 message : Human - readable e x p l a n a t i o n of the outcome
69 eg : ‘ f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’) ‘
70
71 m a s t e r _ r o u t e r take care of parsing the agent response .
72
73 I m p l e m e n t a t i o n Note :
74 The router is pre - defined in your ex e cu ti o n e n v i r o n m e n t .
→ R ef er e nc e it in c o n d i t i o n a l edges :
75
76 ‘‘‘ python
77 workflow . a d d _ c o n d i t i o n a l _ e d g e s (
78 " r e s e a r c h e r " ,
79 master_router ,
80 {
81 " ne x t_ no d e ": " coder " ,
82 " r e t r y _ n o d e ": " r e s e a r c h e r " ,
83 " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e ": END , # or previous agent
84 END : END
85 }
86 )
87 ‘‘‘
88 This is for r ef er e nc e only , do not redefine or modify the
→ m a s t e r _ r o u t e r .
89
90 ### Tools
91
92 A list of tool package and their given tools will be
→ specified , for example :
93
94 Tool ‘ MCP_5098 ‘ is a c o l l e c t i o n of tools with the
→ f ol lo w in g c a p a b i l i t i e s : [ ’ e x t r a c t _ c o d e _ f r o m _ h t m l ’ ,
→ ’ list_html_files ’]
95 Tool ‘ MCP_WEB_BROWSER ‘ is a c o l l e c t i o n of tools with the
→ f ol lo w in g c a p a b i l i t i e s : [ ’ search ’ , ’ navigate ’]
96
98
100
97 ## 4. How to Build a Workflow
99 Your output must be a single , runnable Python script .
→ Follow this s tr u ct ur e pr e ci se l y .
101 ### Step 1: Define Agent I n s t r u c t i o n s
102 Create a unique i n s t r u c t i o n prompt for each agent . The
→ prompt must include a ‘ C O M P L E T I O N PROTOCOL ‘ section
39→ that tells the agent which keyword to use for
→ success , failure , or other states .
103
104 ‘‘‘ python
105 # Good Example : Specific , contextual , with clear
→ c o m p l e t i o n keywords .
106 i n s t r u c t _ r e s e a r c h e r = """
107 You are a master web r e s e a r c h e r tasked with c o n d u c t i n g
→ thorough online research to gather accurate ,
→ credible i n f o r m a t i o n on a specific topic .
108
109 ## GOAL
110
111 You must conduct research on ... < good search keyword based
→ on user goal >
112
113 ## TASK
114 - Conduct c o m p r e h e n s i v e web searches to address the
→ research o b je ct i ve
115 - P r i o r i t i z e credible sources ( academic papers , g o v e r n m e n t
→ reports , r e pu ta b le news outlets ) over low - quality
→ contenty
116 - Cross - re f er en c e multiple sources to ensure accuracy and
→ resolve any c o n f l i c t i n g i n f o r m a t i o n
117 - Present findings in a clear , s t r u c t u r e d format with
→ proper source a t t r i b u t i o n
118
119 ## RECEIVED I N F O R M A T I O N
120
121 You will only receive a research goal from the user .
→ Likely a research paper title .
122
123 ## C O M P L E T I O N PROTOCOL
124 - On success , end with :
125 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
126
127 - On failure , end with :
128 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
129 """
130 ‘‘‘
131
132 When s ig na l in g FALLBACK , include d i a g n o s t i c info :
133
134 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{{" status ": " FALLBACK " , " message ": " Missing
→ required field : p u b l i c a t i o n _ d a t e in research
→ output "}} ’)
135
136 This helps the upstream agent correct specific issues on
→ retry ."
137
138 A prompt must specify :
139 - Its goal
140 - Received i n f o r m a t i o n from previous agent ( if any )
141 - Full i n f o r m a t i o n needed ( eg : full paper name from user
→ query , full link )
40142 - A c o m p l e t i o n protocol
143
145
144 ### Step 2: Create Agents
146 I n s t a n t i a t e each agent using ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ , a s si gn i ng
→ a name , the i n s t r u c t i o n prompt , and a single tool
→ package .
147
148 ‘‘‘ python
149 # Agent that uses a pre - defined web tool package .
150 a g e n t _ r e s e a r c h e r = S m o l A g e n t F a c t o r y (" r e s e a r c h e r " ,
→ i n s t r u c t _ r e s e a r c h e r , B R O W S E R _ M C P )
151
152 # Agent that writes and executes R code and has shell .
153 a g e n t _ c o d e r = S m o l A g e n t F a c t o r y (" coder " , instruct_coder ,
→ R _ S C R I P T _ M C P + SH E LL _ MC P )
154 ‘‘‘
155
156 Agent should always be provided with a tool package , If no
→ Tool package seem to fit the task consider using a
→ bash tool mcp .
157
158 These MCP Tools are just example and might not exist , list
→ of av a il a bl e tools will be provided .
159
160 ### Step 4: Assemble the Graph
161 Put e v e r y t h i n g together into a ‘ StateGraph ‘.
162 Do not compile the workflow , it is already in the context .
163 Be sure to name the S t a t e G r a p h ‘ workflow ‘.
164
165 ‘‘‘ python
166
167 # --- WORKFLOW SCRIPT ---
168
169 # 1. M AN D AT OR Y Workflow I n i t i a l i z a t i o n
170 workflow = S t a t e G r a p h ( W o r k f l o w S t a t e ) # W o r k f l o w S t a t e is
→ not a string , it is a defined variable in the
→ context , you should use W o r k f l o w S t a t e as a variable
→ passed as argument to the S t a t e G r a p h
171
173 172 # 2. AGENT I N S T R U C T I O N S ( Define all prompts here )
i n s t r u c t _ r e s e a r c h e r = """
174 You are a web research s p e c i a l i s t focused on ga t he ri n g
→ comprehensive , credible i n f o r m a t i o n on any given
→ topic .
175
176 ## GOAL
177
178 You must search for the latest news on the use of entropy
→ in AI research .
179
180 ## I N S T R U C T I O N
181 You must find c o m p r e h e n s i v e i n f o r m a t i o n on < research
→ goal >...
182
183 ## RECEIVED I N F O R M A T I O N
41184 You will receive a research topic or question from the
→ user that needs i n v e s t i g a t i o n .
185
186 ## C O M P L E T I O N PROTOCOL
187 - On success , end with :
188 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
189
190 - On failure , end with :
191 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
192
194 195 """
196
197 193 - On i m p o s s i b l e task , end with :
f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " RETRY " , " message ": "..."} ’)
i n s t r u c t _ c o d e r = """
198 You are a Python coding s p e c i a l i s t r e s p o n s i b l e for
→ writing , executing , and d eb u gg i ng code based on
→ research data .
199
200 202
203 ## I N S T R U C T I O N
201 You must i mp l em en t a code for < user goal >...
## RECEIVED I N F O R M A T I O N
204 You will receive research findings or data from previous
→ agents that you need to process or analyze through
→ code .
205
207
206 ## C O M P L E T I O N PROTOCOL
208 - On success , end with :
209 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
210
212 213
211 - On coding failure , end with :
f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " RETRY " , " message ": "..."} ’)
214 - On missing data , end with :
215 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " FALLBACK " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
216
217 - On i m p o s s i b l e task , end with :
218 f i n a l _ a n s w e r (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ":
→ "..."} ’)
219 """
220
221 # 3. AGENT CREATION ( I n s t a n t i a t e all agents here )
222 a g e n t _ r e s e a r c h e r = S m o l A g e n t F a c t o r y (" r e s e a r c h e r " ,
→ i n s t r u c t _ r e s e a r c h e r , W E B _ S E A R C H _ M C P + SH E LL _M C P )
223 a g e n t _ c o d e r = S m o l A g e n t F a c t o r y (" coder " , instruct_coder ,
→ P Y T H O N _ E D I T I N G _ M C P + S H EL L_ M CP )
224
225 # 4. NODE D E F I N I T I O N ( Add agents to the workflow here )
226 workflow . add_node (" r e s e a r c h e r " ,
→ W o r k f l o w N o d e F a c t o r y . c r e a t e _ a g e n t _ n o d e ( a g e n t _ r e s e a r c h e r ) )
42227 workflow . add_node (" coder " ,
→ W o r k f l o w N o d e F a c t o r y . c r e a t e _ a g e n t _ n o d e ( a g e n t _ c o d e r ) )
228
229 # 5. EDGE D E F I N I T I O N ( Wire the graph together here )
workflow . add_edge ( START , " r e s e a r c h e r ")
230 231
233 232 # m a s t e r _ r o u t e r is a method that can return one of
→ [" n e xt _ no de " , " r e t r y _ n o d e " , " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e " , workflow . a d d _ c o n d i t i o n a l _ e d g e s (
" r e s e a r c h e r " ,
master_router , # always trust the m a s t e r _ r o u t e r
END ]
234 235 236 {
237 " ne x t_ no d e ": 238 " r e t r y _ n o d e ": 239 " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e ": " coder " ,
" r e s e a r c h e r " ,
" k n o w l e d g e _ a g e n t " ,
240 END : END
241 }
242 )
243
244 workflow . a d d _ c o n d i t i o n a l _ e d g e s (
245 " coder " ,
246 master_router , # always trust the m a s t e r _ r o u t e r
247 {
248 " ne x t_ no d e ": " < next agen " or END > ,
249 " r e t r y _ n o d e ": " coder " ,
250 " f a l l b a c k _ n o d e ": END ,
251 END : END
252 }
253 )
254 # --- END OF SCRIPT ---
255 ‘‘‘
256
257 ## 5. Final C he ck l is t
258
259 - [ ] ** Output Format **: Your entire response is a single
→ Python script wrapped in ‘‘‘ python ... ‘ ‘ ‘.
260 - [ ] ** Final Response Format **: ensure that the final
→ response from the last agent strictly respects the
→ format re q ue s te d by the user
261 - [ ] ** No Imports **: Do not import or redefine the
→ provided context c o m p o n e n t s ( ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ ,
→ etc .) .
262 - [ ] ** G u a r a n t e e d Exit **: Does the workflow have a clear
→ start and a g u a r a n t e e d path to ‘ END ‘?
263 - [ ] ** Smart fallback **: Avoid using fallback node on the
→ previous agent , fallback to more early agent to
→ avoid infinite loop , you may use a judge agent to
→ decide on routing .
264 - [ ] ** V a l i d a t i o n + Cleaning **: A last agent should be a
→ strict judge designed for minimal s y c o n a n p h a n c y that
→ ensure outputs of previous agents respect
→ high - standard . It must also arange files and clean
→ t em po r ar y one .
265 - [ ] ** No overkill prompt **: Prompt for agent should stay
→ short and should not contain code example .
266
43267 The workflow can be composed of various c o n d i t i o n a l flows ,
→ enabling loops , branching , or complex custom logic
→ d ep en d in g on the user goals . To achieve robust and
→ adaptive behaviors , it is r e c o m m e n d e d to apply
→ e s t a b l i s h e d multi - agent system best p r ac ti c es . These
→ include using s p e c i a l i z e d agents such as an
→ LLM - as -a - Judge for a r b i t r a t i o n and evaluation ,
→ i n t r o d u c i n g c o n d i t i o n a l agent loops to refine
→ outputs iteratively , and l e v e r a g i n g c o ns en s us
→ m e c h a n i s m s between agents to improve re a so ni n g
→ quality .
268
269 ## 6. Rules
270
271 1. All agent should be given a shell tool in addition to
→ their primary tool .
272 2. All survey / document analysis agent should have a tool
→ to take note ( such as text editing tool ) , in
→ addition to their shell and document e x t r a c t i o n
→ tools .
273 3. Document e x t r a c t i o n such as PDF should ALWAYS use
→ multiple - agents i nc l ud in g judge agent should
→ d ec om p os e the task and refine until quality is
→ deemed s u f f i c i e n t .
12.3.2 Workflow improvement prompt
Located in sources/core/dgm.py:150:212.
Listing 3: The prompt used for the workflow improvement
1 def i m p r o v e m e n t _ p r o m p t ( self , goal : str , wf_info :
→ WorkflowInfo , fl ow _ co d e : str , r u n _ s t d e r r : str ,
→ i t e r a t i o n _ c o u n t : int ) -> str :
2 e x e c _ r e s u l t = ""
3 wf_state = wf_info . s t a t e _ r e s u l t if wf_info else None
4 j u d g e _ e v a l = wf_info . j u d g e _ e v a l u a t i o n if wf_info else
→ None
5
6 if j u d g e _ e v a l : # use judge evalu if possible
7 e x e c _ r e s u l t = j u d g e _ e v a l
8 elif wf_state : # a l t e r n a t i v e : use agents answer dict
9 e x e c _ r e s u l t = self . g e t _ f l o w _ a n s w e r s ( wf_state )
10 self . s h o w _ a n s w e r s ( e x e c _ r e s u l t )
11 else : # use stdout / stderr if ex e cu t io n failed
12 e x e c _ r e s u l t = r u n _ s t d e r r . strip ()
13
15 16 17 14 i m p r o v _ p r o m p t = " Previous attempt failed . Learn from
→ mistakes and improve the multi - agent workflow ."
if f lo w_ c od e is not None :
i m p r o v _ p r o m p t = "\ n ". join ([
"## SELF - I M P R O V E M E N T STEP " ,
18 " Your previous attempt at g e n e r a t i n g a
→ workflow did not succeed or didn ’ t reach
→ success t hr e sh ol d ." ,
19 " Your goal was : " ,
20 goal ,
4421 "\ n " ,
22 "## Previous workflow code :" ,
23 " < python >" ,
24 flow_code ,
25 " </ python >" ,
26 "\ n " ,
27 "## E XE CU T IO N RESULTS ::" ,
28 " This is the answer from each agent during the
→ last e x ec ut i on ." ,
29 " < results >" ,
30 exec_result ,
31 " </ results >" ,
32 " Reflect on your previous attempt and identify
→ what went wrong ." ,
33 "\ n " ,
34 "## ANALYZE FAILURES :" ,
35 "1. If the workflow code ex ec u ti o n failed ,
→ analyze the error and fix the python
→ code . If no workflow was generated , this
→ is most likely because prompt were too
→ long , invalid syntax or ‘‘‘
→ d e l i m i t a t i o n missing ( ‘ ‘ ‘ python ... ‘ ‘ ‘) " ,
36 "2. If an agent failed due to tool
→ limitations , consider an a l t e r n a t i v e
→ tool ." ,
37 "3. If an agent failed due to lack of
→ information , add a research step ." ,
38 "4. If agent didn ’ t behave as expected , refine
→ the prompt or agent role ." ,
39 "5. Consider adding error handling or
→ v a l i d a t i o n steps ." ,
40 "\ n " ,
41 "## GENERATE ONE I M P R O V E M E N T :" ,
42 " Select the SINGLE most i mp a ct f ul change from
→ above ." ,
43 " Apply ONLY that one change to the code ." ,
44 " Explain what will improve and why ." ,
45 "\ n " ,
46 " Your i m p r o v e m e n t will be e m p i r i c a l l y
→ v al id a te d against the baseline ." ,
47 ])
48
49 return "". join (
50 [
51 f " Attempt { i t e r a t i o n _ c o u n t + 1} of workflow
→ g e n e r a t i o n .\ n " ,
52 improv_prompt ,
53 " Target goal :\ n " ,
54 goal ,
55 ]
56 )
12.3.3 LLM-as-a-judge prompt for workflow scoring
Located in sources/evaluation/evaluator.py:287-340.
45Listing 4: The prompt used for the LLM-as-a-Judge scoring workflow
1 prompt = f """
2 { e x e c u t i o n _ t e x t }
3
4 E V A L U A T I O N TASK :
5 Based on the complete e x ec u ti on state and workflow code
→ above ,
6 provide a score for each category .
7 Give your score as a float on a scale of 0.0 to 1.0 , where
→ 0.0 means is a total failure , and 1.0 means a
→ perfect e xe c ut io n .
8 Analyse the full JSON state and workflow i m p l e m e n t a t i o n to
→ make your ju dg e me n t .
9 Please be objective , technical , and specific in your
→ feedback .
10
11 CRITERIA :
12 1. GOAL AL I GN M EN T
13 Did the ex e cu t io n achieve the defined ob j ec ti v e ?
14 Were all required steps c om p le te d ?
15 Were there u n e x p e c t e d d e v i a t i o n s ?
16
17 2. AGENT C O L L A B O R A T I O N
18 Did agents pass data c o rr ec t ly ?
19 Did agents handle failures g r a c e f u l l y ?
20
21 3. OUTPUT QUALITY
22 Is the output complete ?
23 Is the output well - fo r ma tt e d ?
24
25 """ + ( f """4. ANSWER C O R R E C T N E S S
26 Answer should be : { answer }
27 Is the answer f a ct u al ly correct ?
28 Is the answer l o gi c al ly c o n s i s t e n t ?
29 Is the answer precise ?
30 """ if answer else "") + """
31
32 Respond in this exact format :
33 [
34 {
35 " category ": " g o a l _ a l i g n m e n t " ,
36 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] ,
37 " evidence ": "[ Specific JSON paths / logs proving
→ o bj ec t iv e f u l f i l l m e n t ]"
38 } ,
39 {
40 " category ": " a g e n t _ c o l l a b o r a t i o n " ,
41 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] ,
42 " evidence ": "[ Message history snippets or error
→ logs ]"
43 } ,
44 {
45 " category ": " o u t p u t _ q u a l i t y " ,
46 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] ,
47 " evidence ": "[ Output v a l i d a t i o n errors or missing
→ fields ]"
48 }""" + ("""
4649 ,{
50 51 52 53 54 ]
55 """
" category ": " a n s w e r _ c o r r e c t n e s s " ,
" score ": [0.0 -1.0] ,
" evidence ": "[ Factual accuracy }""" if answer else "") + """
v e r i f i c a t i o n ]"
12.3.4 GPT-4o struggle in single agent mode
GPT-4o consistently struggled to adhere to the code schema required by the
HuggingFace framework, repeatedly failing to generate properly formatted code
blocks. Often tried to terminate execution, yet failed to invoke the final answer
tool. Explaining its low success rate in single-agent mode.
Listing 5: Logs of GPT-4o consistently struggled to adhere to the code schema
required by the Hugging Face framework
1 - E xe c ut i ng parsed code :
2 # R ec om m en d focused platform e n v i r o n m e n t review or
→ support function for a d d r e s s i n g dataset access
3 print (" Please engage with platform support to undergo a
→ targeted review of access permits or tool
→ s pe ci f ic s relative to dataset
4 handling .")
5
6 Ex ec u ti o n logs :
7 Please engage with platform support to undergo a targeted
→ review of access permits or tool sp e ci f ic s relative
→ to dataset handling .
8
9 Out : None
10 [ Step 183: Duration 3.94 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,353 ,139
→ | Output tokens : 16 ,486]
11
12 Error in code parsing :
13 Your code snippet is invalid , because the regex pattern
→ was not found in it .
14 Here is your code snippet :
15 Engaging with platform support to undergo a targeted
→ review of access p e r m i s s i o n s or tool sp e ci fi c s in
→ relation to dataset handling is
16 es s en ti a l . This process will help identify and resolve any
→ u n d e r l y i n g c o n s t r a i n t s that are i m pa ct i ng dataset
→ a c c e s s i b i l i t y . If further
17 guidance or a s s i s t a n c e is needed , feel free to reach out !
18 Make sure to include code with the correct pattern , for
→ instance :
19 Thoughts : Your thoughts
20 Code :
21 # Your python code here
22 < end_code >
23 Make sure to provide correct code blobs .
24 [ Step 184: Duration 3.18 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,403 ,309
→ | Output tokens : 16 ,540]
25
4726 - E xe c ut i ng parsed code :
27 # Final r e c o m m e n d a t i o n for r e s o l u t i o n involves engaging
→ platform support
28 print (" To resolve dataset access challenges , consult
→ platform support for a c o m p r e h e n s i v e review and
→ n ec es s ar y a d j u s t m e n t s in
c o n f i g u r a t i o n settings .")
29 30
31 Ex e cu ti o n logs :
32 To resolve dataset access challenges , consult platform
→ support for a c o m p r e h e n s i v e review and n ec e ss a ry
→ a d j u s t m e n t s in c o n f i g u r a t i o n
33 settings .
34
35 Out : None
36 [ Step 185: Duration 3.29 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,453 ,708
→ | Output tokens : 16 ,617]
37
38 Error in code parsing :
39 Your code snippet is invalid , because the regex pattern
→ was not found in it .
40 [ Step 186: Duration 2.85 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,504 ,290
→ | Output tokens : 16 ,669]
41
42 - E xe c ut i ng parsed code :
43 # Suggest a l t e r n a t i v e e n g a g e m e n t or c o n f i r m a t i o n on
→ p e r s i s t e n t data a c c e s s i b i l i t y
44 print (" Pursue a lt er n at e m e t h o d o l o g y or request platform
→ support c l a r i f i c a t i o n re g ar di n g data access
→ e xe cu t io n al ig n me n t .")
45
46 Ex e cu ti o n logs :
47 Pursue a l te r na te m e t h o d o l o g y or request platform support
→ c l a r i f i c a t i o n re ga r di n g data access e x ec ut i on
→ a li gn m en t .
48
49 Out : None
50 [ Step 187: Duration 3.27 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,555 ,097
→ | Output tokens : 16 ,759]
51
52 - E xe c ut i ng parsed code :
53 # Advise ex p lo r in g solution - oriented pathways with
→ platform c o o r d i n a t i o n
54 print (" Engage platform support for o p e r a t i o n a l guidance
→ or r e a s s e s s m e n t of c o m p l i a n c e with dataset
→ i n t e g r a t i o n p o s s i b i l i t i e s .")
48